 
Commission européenne/Europese Commissie, 1049 Bruxelles/Brussel, BELGIQUE/BELGIË – Tel. +32 22991111 
  EUROPEAN COMMISSION  
DIRECTORATE -GENERAL  
TAXATION AND CUSTOMS UNION  
Indirect Taxation and Tax Administration  
CBAM, Energy and Green Taxation  
  
  
Brussels, 21 November  2023 
 
 
 
 
GUIDANCE DOCUMENT ON CBAM  IMPLEMENTATION FOR 
INSTALLATION  OPERATORS  OUTSIDE THE EU 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
This guidance document represents the views of the European Commission Services at the 
time of publication. It is not legally binding.  
  

2 VERSION HISTORY  
Date  Version notes  
17 Aug 2023 First Publication  
26 Oct 2023 The following corrections were made:  
• Some clarification in section 6.7.3 (electricity and CHP)  
• Improvement of worked sector examples, in particular  
• cement, section 7.1.3 ( minor clarifications)  
• steel ( 7.2.2.1, in particular calculation of the waste gas 
deduction)  
• mixed fertilizer (section 7.3.2, minor clarifications ) 
• Aluminium (section 7.4.2 minor clarifications ) 
• Hydrogen (section 7.5.2 – not all produced H 2 is sold)  
• Various typos, references and formats corrected.  
21 Nov 2023 Correction  on de minimis r ule 
  
  
  
 
   
3  
CONTENTS  
1 SUMMARY  6 
2 INTRODUCTION 7 
2.1 About this document  7 
2.2 How to use this document  8 
2.3 Where to find further information  8 
3 QUICK GUIDE FOR OPERATORS  11 
4 THE CARBON BORDER ADJUSTMENT MECHANISM  19 
4.1 Introduction to the CBAM  19 
4.2 Definitions and scope of emissions covered in the CBAM  20 
4.3 Transitional period  21 
4.3.1  Key reporting roles and responsibilities  22 
4.3.2  What needs to be monitored by you (as an operator)  23 
4.3.3  Reporting periods for operators and importers  24 
4.3.4  Governance of the CBAM 26 
4.3.5  Inward processing  27 
5 CBAM GOODS AND PRODUCTION ROUTES  29 
5.1 Foreword to sector specific sections  29 
5.2 Identifying CBAM goods  30 
5.2.1  Product specifications  30 
5.2.2  Identifying goods in scope for the CBAM Regulation  30 
5.3 Cement sector  31 
5.3.1  Unit of production and embedded emissions for industry sector  31 
5.3.2  Definition and explanation of goods covered  32 
5.3.3  Definition and explanation of relevant production processes and routes  33 
5.4 Chemicals sector – Hydrogen  37 
5.4.1  Unit of production and embedded emissions  38 
5.4.2  Definition and explanation of sector CBAM goods covered  38 
5.4.3  Definition and explanation of relevant production processes and routes  39 
5.5 Fertilizers sector  42 
5.5.1  Unit of production and embedded emissions  43 
5.5.2  Definition and explanation of sector CBAM goods covered  44 
5.5.3  Definition and explanation of relevant production processes and routes  45 
5.6 Iron and Steel sector  50 
5.6.1  Unit of production and embedded emissions  50 
5.6.2  Definition and explanation of sector CBAM goods covered  51 
4 5.6.3  Definition and explanation of relevant production processes and emissions 
covered  56 
5.7 Aluminium sector 69 
5.7.1  Unit of production and embedded emissions  69 
5.7.2  Definition and explanation of sector goods covered  70 
5.7.3  Definition and explanation of relevant production processes and routes  72 
6 MONITORING AND REPORTING OBLIGATIONS  79 
6.1 Definitions and scope of emissions covered in the CBAM  81 
6.1.1  Installation, production process and production routes  81 
6.1.2  Activity level, quantity of goods produced  81 
6.1.3  Direct and indirect embedded emissions  82 
6.1.4  Units for reporting embedded emissions  84 
6.2 How to determine embedded emissions  84 
6.2.1  The concept  84 
6.2.2  From installation’s emissions to goods’ embedded emissions  85 
6.3 Defining production process system boundaries and production routes  96 
6.4 Planning your monitoring  100 
6.4.1  What documentation is needed to plan your monitoring  100 
6.4.2  Monitoring methodology principles and procedures  101 
6.4.3  Written procedures  102 
6.4.4  Choosing best available data sources  102 
6.4.5  Limiting monitoring -related costs  105 
6.4.6  Control measures and quality management  106 
6.5 Determine installation’s direct emissions  107 
6.5.1  Calculation based approach  110 
6.5.2  Measurement based Methodology – Continuous Emission Measurement 
Systems (CEMS)  122 
6.5.3  Non-EU country specific methods  125 
6.5.4  Treatment of biomass emissions  126 
6.5.5  Determine PFC (perfluorocarbon) emissions  127 
6.5.6  Rules for transfers of CO 2 between installations  128 
6.6 Determine installation’s indirect emissions  130 
6.7 Rules required for attributing emissions to production processes  131 
6.7.1  Generic rules for metering of parameters to be attributed to production 
processes  131 
6.7.2  Rules for heat energy and emissions  134 
6.7.3  Rules for electrical energy and its emissions  141 
6.7.4  Rules for combined heat and power  143 
6.7.5  Rules for waste gas energy and emissions  146 
6.8 Calculation of embedded emissions of goods  148 
6.8.1  Rules for goods produced  148 
6.8.2  Rules for monitoring of precursor data  150 
6.9 Use of default factors and other estimation methods  152 
6.9.1  Default specific embedded emission values  152 
5 6.9.2  Default emission factors for grid electricity  153 
6.9.3  Minor data gaps in installation’s monitoring data 153 
6.10  Reporting the effective carbon price due 154 
6.11  Reporting template 156 
6.11.1  For operators  158 
6.11.2  For reporting declarants  160 
7 SECTOR SPECIFIC MONITORING AND REPORTING  162 
7.1 Cement sector  163 
7.1.1  Sector- specific requirements for monitoring and reporting  163 
7.1.2  Example for splitting a cement installation into separate production 
processes  167 
7.1.3  Worked example for the cement sector  170 
7.2 Iron and Steel sector  174 
7.2.1  Sector- specific requirements for monitoring and reporting  175 
7.2.2  Worked examples for the iron and steel sectors  177 
7.3 Fertilizers sector  191 
7.3.1  Sector- specific requirements for monitoring and reporting  192 
7.3.2  Worked example for the fertilizer sector  195 
7.4 Aluminium sector 197 
7.4.1  Sector- specific requirements for monitoring and reporting  198 
7.4.2  Worked example for the aluminium sector  202 
7.5 Chemicals – Hydrogen sector  208 
7.5.1  Sector- specific requirements for monitoring and reporting  208 
7.5.2  Worked examples for the hydrogen sector  211 
7.6 Electricity “as a good” (i.e. imported into the EU)  216 
7.6.1  CO 2 emission factor based the reporting declarant’s data  217 
7.6.2  CO 2 emission factor based on actual CO 2 emissions of the installation  218 
8 EXEMPTIONS FROM THE CBAM  219 
ANNEX A  LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS  220 
ANNEX B  LIST OF DEFINITIONS  222 
ANNEX C  DEFAULT VALUES  230 
ANNEX D – FURTHER INFORMATION ON BIOMASS  241 
ANNEX E – STANDARD VALUES FOR EMISSION CALCULATIONS  249 
 
  
6 1 SUMMARY  
The Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism ( CBAM ) is an environmental policy 
instrument designed to apply the same carbon costs to imported products as would be 
incurred by installations  operating in the E uropean Union (EU) . In doing so, the CBAM 
reduces  the risk of the EU's climate objectives being undermined by production relocating 
to countries with less ambitious decarbonisation policies  (so-called ‘carbon leakage’) .  
Under the CBAM, in its definitive (post -transitional) period EU authorised declarants 
representing the importers of certain goods will purchase and  surrender CBAM certificates 
for the embedded emissions of their imported goods. As the price for those certificates will 
derive from the EU Emission Trading System (EU ETS ) allowance price, and since 
Monitoring, Reporting and Verification  (MRV ) rules have been desig ned based on  the 
MRV system  of the EU ETS , this will equalise the price of carbon incurred between 
imported goods and goods produced in installations participating in the EU ETS. 
This guidance document is part of a series of guidance documents and electronic templates 
provided by the European Commission to support the harmonised implementation of the 
CBAM during the transitional period  (1 October 2023 to 31 December 2025) . It 
provides  an introduction to the CBAM and the concepts to be used for monitoring and 
reporting of stationary installations. This guidance does not add to the mandatory requirements of the CBAM , but it is aimed at assisting correct interpretation to facilitate 
implementation.  
This guidance document represents the vi ews of the European Commission Services at the 
time of publication. It is not legally binding.  
    
7 2 INTRODUCTION  
2.1 About this document  
This document has been written to support  stakeholders  by explaining the  requirements  of 
the CBAM Regulation in a non- legis lative language. This guidance focuses on the 
requirements for operators  of installations producing CBAM goods outside of the EU  
for the transitional period , from 1 October 2023 to 31 December 2025,  during whic h 
time the CBAM is applied without a financial obligation for importers and solely  for d ata 
collection purposes .  
• Section  3 provides a quick guidance for the intended reader of this document, the 
operator of an installation producing CBAM goods. It gives a roadmap to the most 
important concepts of CBAM emissions monit oring and where to find more 
information in this document. 
• Section  4 provides an introduction to the CBAM and an overview of the 
compliance cycle, roles and responsibilities and milestones and deadlines for operators of installations outs ide the EU during the transitional period.  
• Section  5 presents an overview of the production processes and value chains for 
the sectors and goods t hat are included in the scope of the CBAM. 
• Section  6 sets out the monitoring and reporting obligations and recommendations 
which are potentially applicable to any affected producer of CBAM goods.  
• Section  7 adds to this with sector specific monitoring and reporting considerations 
for each CBAM good where this is relevant. The section  is supplemented by 
examples for each sector.   
• Section  8 explains the general exemptions from the CBAM.  
A separate guidance document is provided by the European Commission for importers of CBAM goods (“reporting declarants”).  The guidance documents are accompanied  by an 
electronic template for information that should be used  by installation operators to 
communicate information to the reporting declarant s. 
 
Presentation of numbers in EU documents  
To al ign with EU leg al documents, this guidance document uses the following 
convention when presenting numbers . 
The decimal separator used to separate the integral part of a number from its fractional part is a comma, e.g.: 0,890 
Thousands , and powers of 10
3n thereafter, are separated by a space, e.g.:  
• fifteen thousand is written as 15 000 
• fifteen million is written as 15 000 000 
8 
Simplified!   
2.2 How to use this document  
Where article numbers are given in this document without further specification, they 
always refer to the CBAM  Regulation1. Where the ‘ Implementing Regulation’ is cited, it 
means the Regulation2 which sets out the detailed MRV rules for the transitional period . 
For acronyms  and definitions used in this document, please see Annex A  and Annex B . 
A series of icons are used throughout to help guide the reader:  
Icon  Description of use  
 Points to information of particular importance for operators of installations produc ing CBAM goods . 
 Highlights simplified approache s of the general requirements of 
the CBAM.  
 
Used where recommended improvements  are presented  
 Used where other documents, templates or electronic tools are available from other sources  
 
Points to examples given for the topics discussed in the surrounding text. 
 Highlights sections that refer to the definitive period of the CBAM, rather than the transitional period  
 
2.3 Where to find further information  
The textbox below signposts the key sections of the CBAM Regulation and the 
Implementing Regulation  that are relevant to operators of installations producing 
CBAM goods  during the transitional period . 
The CBAM Regulation  
Regulation (EU) 2023/956 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 10 May 2023 establishing a carbon border adjustment mechanism .  
Available from:  http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2023/956/oj   
 
1  Regulation (EU) 2023/956 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 10 May 2023 establishing 
a carbon border adjustment mechanism ; Available from : http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2023/956/oj   
2  Commission Implementing Regu lation (EU ) 2023/1773 of 17 August 2023  laying down the rules for 
the application of Regulation (EU) 2023/956 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards reporting obligations for the purposes of the carbon border adjustment mechanism during t he transitional 
period; Available from:  http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_impl/2023/1773/oj   
9  
• Article 2 – sets out the scope of t he CBAM  with reference to Annex I.  
• Article 3 and Annex I V – provide definitions for common terms used in t he 
CBAM.  
• Article 10 – sets out requirement s for operator registration under the CBAM  
(from 31 December 2024 ). 
• Article 30  – requires  the European Commission to undertake a review of the 
scope of the CBAM  by 31 December 2024.  
• Articles 32 to 35 – set out the reporting obligations on EU importers in the 
transitional period. 
• Article 36 – sets out the dates from when the other articles start to apply.  
• Annex I – provides the list of CBAM goods by industry sector with CN code to 
identify goods, and the corresponding relevant greenhouse gases.  
• Annex III – identifies the non- EU countries and territories that are not covered 
by the CBAM. 
• Annex IV – provides the gener al methods for calculating the embedded 
emissions in goods; in section 2 for Simple Goods and in section 3 for Complex Goods. 
 
Implementing Regulation  (pursuant to Article 35( 7) of the CBAM Regulation): 
Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2023/1773, available from:  
http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_impl/2023/1773/oj   
• Article 2 and Annex II Section 1  – provide definitions for common terms 
used in the CBAM and the MRV rules.  
• Article 3 – provides the reporting obligations of the reporting declarants, 
including the parameters for which data is to be reported. 
• Articles  4 and 5 – set out the approaches for the calculation of the embedded 
emissions and c onditions for the use of default values. 
• Article 7 – indicates the information to be reported regarding the carbon price 
due. 
• Article 16 – relates to the penalties that shall be applied by Member States if 
the reporting declarant has not correctly fulfilled its reporting obligations.  
• Articles 19 and 22 – set out technical elements of the CBAM Transitional Registry. 
• Annex I : Table 1 -  CBAM Report Structure , Table 2 -  Detailed information 
requirements in the CBAM report . 
• Annex  II: Section 2, Table 1  – mapping of CN codes to the  CBAM aggregated
 
goods categories; and Section 3 – definition of production processes for the CBAM goods categories, including system boundaries of production routes and relevant precursors.  
10 • Annex III:  Rules for monitoring emissions at installation level, for attributing 
them to production processes, and for determining specific direct and indirect 
embedded emissions of simple and complex goods . It is structured in sections 
as follows:  
o A. Principles  
o B. Monitoring of direct emissions at installation level 
o C. Monitoring of heat flows  
o D. Monitoring of electricity  
o E. Monitoring of precursors  
o F. Rules for attributing emissions of an installation to goods  
o G. Calculation of specific embedded emissions of complex goods  
o H. Optional measures to increase quality of data  
• Annex IV : Minimum data to be reported by producers of goods (“operators”) 
to importers  (or reporting declarants).  
• Annexes V to VII : Tables listing data requirements for other report s, 
including for inward processing (by importers) , EORI and the National Import 
System . 
• Annex VIII:  Standard factors that may be used for the monitoring of direct 
emissions . 
• Annex IX : Reference values for efficiency of separate production of heat and 
electricity, to be used in CHP calculations . 
 
 
All EU legislation can be  found on:  eur- lex.europa.eu/homepage.html  
Other guidance and training materials that have been produced by the European 
Commission to help operator s and import ers include:  
• A separate guidance document is provided by the European Commission for importers of CBAM goods into the EU  (“reporting declarants”) .  
• Guidance developed for importers on how to complete quarterly reports on the CBAM Trader Portal . 
• Excel -based template for operator s to automatically calculate embedded 
emissions and communicate this data clearly to importers o f goods   
• Training videos. 
 
The guidance documents and template are available on the dedicated website for the 
CBAM of the European Commission:  https://taxation -customs.ec.europa.eu/carbon-
border -adjustment -mechanism_en    
 
11 3 QUICK GUIDE FOR OPERATORS  
In this section  we provide a step -by-step overview of important concepts, rules and 
obligations under the transitional period.  
Are you an operator of an installation producing “CBAM goods”?  
CBAM goods are goods currently imported into  the EU from the cement, iron and steel, 
aluminium and some chemical industries ( fertilizer s and hydrogen), and electricity. To  
answer this question, you must  compare the CN codes3 of your products against the list of 
goods given in Annex I to  the CBAM Re gulation. More information on how to approach 
this can be found in Section 5.2 of this document , and subs equent sub- section s within 
section  5 set out further detail for each sector . 
If you do not produce such goods, you do not have to read this document. However, it is 
written to be of help also to all other kinds of interested audiences (academia, CBAM importers, GHG verifiers, competent authorities, consultants, etc.) . If you just want to 
understand how the CBAM works in general , you may find an introduction to the 
CBAM in Section  4. 
Are you exporting your goods to customers in EU Member States?  
The CBAM affects you if this is the case.  
Please note that your products may also be purchased by clients who themselves 
manufacture CBAM goods, and your products may serve as “precursor” for their CBAM goods, which then may be exported to EU countries. Also, if you sell your products to 
traders who then sell them to EU customers, your goods fall under the CBAM.  
In all those cases where CBAM goods end up in being imported into the EU, at some point 
the importer will contact you to gather information on the “embedded emissions” of the se 
CBAM goods. Alternatively, the operator using your goods as precursor for producing 
other CBAM goods will ask the level of embedded emissions. Therefore, you must  be 
prepared to provide these data  and as soon as possible start to develop a monitoring 
methodology at your installation, as described in  this guidance document.  
What are embedded emissions?  The concept has been developed to  reflect as much as 
possible the way in which emissions are covered by the EU ETS if the CBAM goods were 
produced in the EU. The EU ETS requires operators to pay a price for their own (“direct”) 
emissions. However, if they consume electricity, they also experience the CO
2 costs 
included in the price of electricity they purchase4 (“indirect emissions ”). The same applies 
to the input materials need ed for their production pr ocess, and which may be supplied by 
an EU ETS installation. These so- called precursors therefore contribute to the CO 2 costs 
the EU ETS installation faces. The “embedded emissions” are defined in parallel to the emissions causing CO
2 costs in the EU ETS: t hey take into account the direct and indirect5 
emissions of the production process as well as the embedded emissions of precursors. They are similar in concept to a carbon footprint of the goods. The  scope of the  CBAM is 
 
3  CN (Common Nomenclature) codes are the EU version of the HS (Harmonised System) codes for 
international trade. CN codes consist usually of 8 digits (the first 6 digits are identical to the HS code). 
Where Annex I to the CBAM Regulation contains fewer digits, it means that all CN codes starting with 
those digits are cover ed. 
4  If the EU installation produces its own electricity, it experiences the CO 2 costs directly.  
5  Indirect emissions have to be reported for all CBAM goods during the transitional period. Although at 
this stage only a smaller number of goods is include d in Annex II to the CBAM Regulation, and only 
those will have to cover indirect emissions in the definitive period.  
12 principally related to the rules o f the EU ETS and therefore has differences to other 
methods for calculating product carbon footprints such as the “GHG Protocol” or 
ISO14067.  
A detailed introduction to the concept and calculation of embedded emissions is given in section  6.2. 
What do you need to monitor? To answer this question, you need to perform the 
following steps to develop your “monitoring methodology documentation”, i.e. the handbook you and your personnel use as a basis for performing monitoring tasks in a consistent way during the coming years. T he presented steps will ensure that all the data 
which you need to calculate embedded emissions  is covered . 
• Step 1: D efine the installation’s boundaries , production processes and production 
routes. Production process means the system boundaries which are n eeded  to attribute 
emissions to specific goods produced
6. Each “Aggregated good category” (i.e. an 
aggregation of goods with different CN codes, but suitable to be covered by common 
monitoring rules) corresponds  to one production process. Guidance on syst em 
boundaries is found in S ection  5.2 and for each sector specific sub section in Section 
5. 
• Step 2: Define the reporting period  you are going to use. The default case is the 
(European) calendar year. However, if your installation is situated in a country with a different calendar, or where there are other reasonable arguments for a different 
period, this may be used, too, if it covers at least three months. Suitable  alternative 
periods include , in particular , the reporting periods of a carbon pricing scheme or 
compulsory emissions m onitoring scheme in the country of your installation, or the 
fiscal year used. The main reason for choosing such other periods is that there may be additional scrutiny applied for those purposes, such as  stock taking and financial 
auditing for annual finan cial accounts , or third- party verification of emissions, which 
gives a higher level of confidence in the quality of your data when also used for 
CBAM purposes. Further guidance on reporting periods is given in Section 4.3.3. 
• Step 3: Identify all the parameters you need to monitor :  
o Direct emissions  of the installation: you have two options available:  
a) The “calculation -based” approach, where you need to determine the 
quantities of all fuels and relevant materials
7 consumed, and 
corresponding “calculation factors” (in particular the so- called “emission 
factor ” based on the carbon content of the fuel or material);  
b) The “measurement -based” approach, where you need to measure online the 
concentration of the greenhouse gases  as well as the flow of the flue gas  
for each “emission source” (stack).  
Note, however, that during an introductory phase until 31 July 2024 you may apply other methods allowed for emissions monitoring in your jurisdiction , 
if they lead to a similar emission coverage and accuracy. These other methods 
may include default values made available and published by the European 
Commission for the transitiona l period. O ther default values  can be used on the 
condition that the reporting declarant indicate s and references  in the CBAM 
 
6 If you are familiar with the EU ETS, it may help you to understand the concept of “production process” 
that it is very similar to the “su b-installations” used for benchmarking.  
7  The term “source stream” is used to cover both, fuels and other input or output materials that have an 
influence on emissions.  
13 reports the methodology followed for establishing such values . For PFC8 
emissions from primary aluminium production a special methodology based on 
overvoltage measurements should be applied. For N 2O emissions from nitric acid 
production, the measurement -based method is compulsory. In all other cases, 
you may choose which method best fits to the situation of your installation. 
Additi onally, if your installation has more than one production process, there 
may be a need to monitor fuel or material streams between the production 
processes in order to  enable correct attribution of emissions to production 
processes9.  
The rules for monitoring these direct emissions are found in Annex III, section B of the Implementing Regulation. Section 6.4 of this document gives relevant guidance on details. 
o (Direct) emissions related to heat flows
10: Heat consumption (both heat 
produced in the installation or received from a separate installation) needs to be attributed to each production process, and emis sions related to heat exported 
from production processes need to be deducted from the attributed emissions of each production process  from where the heat is produced or recovered. 
Therefore, rules for monitoring heat flows  are found in section C of Annex I II to 
the Implementing Regulation. There are also rules on determining the emission factor of heat . Detailed guidance is found in S ection 6.7.2 of this document. 
o Indirect emissions : These are emissions occurring during the  production of the 
electricity your installation consumes  for its production processes , irrespective of 
whether  this electricity wa s produced w ithin the installation or imported from 
outside . You need to monitor the quantities of electricity consumed  in each 
production process  and multiply it by the relevant emission factor of electricity. 
For the emissions factor, the following options exist:  
a) If the electricity comes from the grid , you use the default emission factor  
provided by the European Commission based on IEA
11 data.  
b) If you produce electricity yourself in your installation (you are an “auto-
producer”) , you need to monitor the emission of the pow er plant or CHP 
plant12 in the same way as you monitor other direct emissions of your 
 
8  Perfluorocarbons.  
9  For example, if a blast furnace produces pig iron, a part of the waste gases is usually used as fuel in other 
parts of the installation (e.g. a power plant or a hot -rolling mill). In such a case, the quantity and 
calculation factors need to be determined also for this waste gas, although they are not necessary to  
calculate the total emissions of the installation.  
10  Note 1: this is only about “ measurable heat ”, i.e. heat that is transported via a heat medium such as 
steam, hot water, liquid salts, etc. and where its flow rate can be measured in a pipe, duct, etc.  Where 
heat is produced in a burner and directly used e.g. in a kiln or dryer there is no need to monitor the heat flow, instead the emissions are determined from the fuel consumption. On the other hand, measurable 
heat is often produced centrally or at se veral points in the installation, which do not directly correspond 
to the system boundaries of production processes. It is therefore useful to determine the emissions of the 
heat production separately, and attribute the emissions to production processes vi a the heat consumed in 
each production process.  
 Note 2: In context of carbon footprints, emissions from (imported) heat is often considered “scope 2 
emissions” and therefore termed “indirect emissions”. Please be aware that in the CBAM legislation as 
well as in this document, the expression “indirect emissions” refers only to electricity, not heat.  
11 International Energy Agency.  
12  CHP means combined heat and power, also known as “cogeneration”.  
14 installation, and use specific rules to calculate the emission factor from 
the fuel mix  and taking into account CHP heat production, if applicable. 
The relevant rules are found in section D of Annex III to  the Implementing 
Regulation. Section 6.7.2 and  section  6.7.4 of this document provide 
guidance on heat and CHP. 
c) If you receive electricity from a specific installation under a “power 
purchase agreement”, p rovided this power plant monitors its emissions  in 
line with the same rules as applicable for auto -produced electricity and 
communicates that information to you appropriately, you may use the resulting emission factor for this electricity.  
Detailed guidance is found in Section 6.7.3 of this document. 
o Precursors : As explained under point 3 above, the concept of embedded 
emissions includes the addition
13 of embedded emissions of certain materials 
used in the production process, the so- called precursors. Which precursors are 
relevant  to each production process is listed in section 3 of Annex II of the 
Implementing Regulation  and is discussed in S ection 5 of this document  for each 
affected sector . The following parameters need to be monitored for each 
precursor material:  
a) If the precursor is produced within your installation, all relevant monitoring is already done in line with the above points. You only need to take the precursor’s embedded emissions into account when calculating the embedded emissions of the goods which use the precursor in the production process.  
b) If you p urchase the precursor from other installations, you need to request 
data from the relevant producers in the same way as you are asked for data when your goods are imported into the EU. The relevant information includes the following, for each precursor, se parately for each installation 
of its production : 
 Identification of the installation where it was produced;  
 The specific
14 direct and indirect embedded emissions of the precursor;  
 The production route, and additional parameters that the importer needs to report when the final good is imported to the EU under the CBAM. 
These additional parameters are listed in section 2 of Annex IV to  the 
Implementing Regulation and discussed in s ection 5 and section 7 of this 
document  for each affected sector . 
 The reporting period applied by the producer of the precursor.  
 If applicable, information on a carbon price due  in the relevant 
jurisdiction production of the precursor (see point 5 below).  
c) In both cases, i.e. for purchased or self -produced precursors, you need to 
monitor the quantity of each precursor you used  during the reporting 
period for each of your production processes.  
 
13  Note the difference between precursors and normal input ma terials: For the determination of direct 
emissions it is taken into account that the carbon atoms contained in a material may be oxidised to CO 2 
and emitted. However, for precursors, additionally the emissions which took place already earlier 
(during their  own production), i.e. the precursor’s embedded emissions, need to be added.  
14  Specific (embedded) emissions means emissions related to one tonne of the material under discussion.  
15 The rules for monitoring precursor -related data are found in section E of Annex 
III to  the Implementing Regulation. More details are given in S ection  6.8.2  of 
this document. 
o Finally, there are some additional qualifying parameters  that the EU importer 
needs to report under the CBAM. These depend on the goods produced. For 
example, for cements imported, the total clinker content needs to be reported, for mixed fertiliz ers the contents of the different forms of nitrogen, etc. The relevant 
parameters are listed in section 2 of Annex IV to  the Implementing Regulation. 
You need to ensure that you collect all the parameters necessary for your CBAM goods and communicate them to the importers of your goods. Guidance can be found in S ection 5 of this document. 
• Step 4: Determine the methodology to monitor  each parameter you have 
identified :  
o For quantities of fuels and materials  (including precursors) used, you may 
either have measurement instruments available which tell you how much has been consumed during the reporting period (e.g. weighing belts, flow m eters, 
heat meters, etc.) or you may determine the used amounts from purchase records 
and stock measurements at the end of each period.  
o For the so- called calculation factors  (e.g. the carbon content of the fuel or 
material) you can either choose a “standard value” from applicable literature (in 
particular national GHG inventories submitted under the UNFCCC/  Paris 
Agreement) or from Annex VIII to  the Implementing Regulation, or you can 
determine them based on laboratory analyses, for which the Implementing Regulation provides further rules in section B.5 of Annex III.  
o For continuous emission measurements, heat flow and electricity measurements 
you also need to define the instruments to use , and applicable calibration and 
maintenance measures.  
o In some cases,  it may be necessary to define estimation methods , or indirect 
methods  based on known correlations of measurement parameters.  
o As the very last resort, if you have no other methods avail able for monitoring 
your goods’ embedded emissions, and in particular if the producer of your precursors used does not provide the required data, you may use the default values for embedded emissions  of CBAM goods (which include all relevant 
precursors) wh ich the European Commission makes available for the purpose. A 
list of the goods  for which default values are available is given in Annex C  of this  
document  with further guidance on their use in Sections  6.9. 
Note that sometimes you may have the choice of different monitoring approaches (e.g. you 
may have more than one measurement instrument, or you need to choose between continual metering and use of batch- wise delivery records, choose between calculation -
based and measurement -based methods, etc.) The Implementing Regulation contains 
provisions  in section A.3 of Annex III on how to select the best available (i.e. most 
accurate) data source. Details are discussed in S ection 6.4 of this document. 
Do you pay a carbon price in your own jurisdiction? To ensure similar treatment 
between installations in the EU ETS and in other countries, a carbon price due in the 
country where a CBAM good is produced will allow  for a reduction in the CBAM 
obligation in the definitive period from 2026 onwards . This is already a reporting 
obligation during the transitional period of the CBAM ( namely until the end of 2025). You 
need to ensur e that you include information on carbon pricing in your monitoring 
16 methodology, so you can convey the relevant information to the importer of your CBAM 
goods. During the transitional period such reporting on the carbon prices  due around the 
world is impor tant for the European Commission to consider any further improvements of 
the CBAM legislation in that regard.  
If your installation is subject to a carbon price, you will have to collect information on the carbon price due , in such a way that you can attribute it to production processes and CBAM 
goods categories in a similar way as you attribute emissions to the goods. The effective  
carbon price is to be considered , i.e. taking into account  any applicable rebates (in case of 
an ETS, any free allocation is considered a rebate).  
Note that you need to collect  information for each precursor purchased  if a carbon price 
applies in its country of origin. If the producer of the precursor does not provide the 
required information, you must  assume the carbon price due for the precursor to be zero.  
The total effective carbon price needs to be attributed to the CBAM goods in a similar way as the specific embedded emissions, i.e. it needs to be expressed  as euros per tonne of 
CBAM good . 
The reporting rules of information regarding the carbon price due are found in Article 7 of 
the Implementing Regulation. Detailed guidance is given in section 6.10 of this document.  
Compile the monitoring methodology documentation (MMD)  
At this point you have listed all the monitoring methods for all the materials or emission sources you need to monitor throughout the year. You should put all of this information 
together into one written documentation (a “CBAM management handbook” of your installation) so that the methodology can be consistently used over the coming years. This should be done in a systematic way ( e.g. by listing all measurement instruments, all reading 
intervals, all data sources for standard values). It is also advisable to use a diagram of the installation where all the necessary instruments, sampling points etc. are indicated.  
The guiding princi ple for setting up this monitoring methodology documentation is that it 
should be sufficiently clear and transparent so that independent persons, who have some knowledge of GHG monitoring, are enabled to understand the monitoring methodology. It needs to be detailed enough to serve as instructions to the installation’s personnel to perform all necessary tasks for determining the embedded emissions of goods. It must therefore also contain the applicable calculation steps, and all calculation factors which ar e 
not determined by analyses.  
Guidance on setting up a MMD is given in S ection  6.4 of this document. It may also be 
helpful to check the monitoring methodology against the “communication template” 
provided by the European Commission (see point 8 below). You may want to use the data requirements of that template for checking the completeness of the MMD.  
Furthermore , the MMD needs to contain control m easures in the data flow from primary 
data to final specific embedded emissions. These measures must be commensurate with the risks for errors. Measures should include frequent checking by an independent person, and comparing data from different sources, c onsistency checking of time series, etc. More 
guidance is found in section 6.4.6 of this document. Perform monitoring throughout the 
reporting perio d: While all the steps above are necessary only once to prepare your 
installation and its staff for the monitoring tasks, this and the following point are to be performed continuously throughout all the following years.  
You have to perform the monitoring tasks defined in the MMD. You  have to regularly read 
fuel meters, take stock of materials consumed or produced, take samples of fuels or materials to be analysed, carry out maintenance, control and calibration of measuring 
17 instrumen ts, etc. You need to collect the relevant data, perform calculation of emissions, 
and perform all relevant quality control and assurance measures defined in the MMD.  
Furthermore, at least once per reporting period, you should review the MMD and check if 
it is still accurate and appropriate. For instance, does it still reflect the technologies used 
in your installation, is the list of produced goods still up to date? Have new fuels or materials become relevant? Can you use better (more accurate) monitoring methods, can you reduce the risk for errors in the data flow? All changes and improvements should be documented in the MMD, and you should ensure that only the latest version of the MMD is used. You may also consider verification by a third- party GHG verif ier as a voluntary 
means to identify weak points in your monitoring methodology and to improve it. Finally, 
you must  communicate the embedded emissions data of your CBAM goods to the EU 
importer(s) who bear(s) the reporting obligation under the CBAM Regulation. As you 
may sell your goods to a multitude of clients, there may be a large number of  EU importers 
who must request this information from you. In order to perform this communication as 
efficiently as possible, the European Commission provides a common template that can be used for this purpose.  
While the use of this template is voluntary, it needs to be highlighted that the use of a common template greatly simplifies the communication  on both ends. Your customers 
may b e established in different EU Member States and may speak different languages, and 
may themselves purchase CBAM goods from many suppliers in different countries. The common template ensures a common reporting format, so that the same type of information can always be found in the same field in the template, and the meaning of each field will also be clear.  
Whenever your chosen reporting period ends  (e.g. after the end of a calendar year), you 
must  compile the monitored data of the whole reporting period , determine the 
attributed emissions of each production process, and divide them by the corresponding 
“activity level” (i.e. the total tonnes of goods under the related CBAM category produced within the reporting period)  in order to get the specific embedded emissions of this good . 
This is the main parameter the EU importer is interested in (plus the additional qualifying parameters mentioned under point 4 step 3 above). Until you finalise the data compilation of the following reporting period, you should use these embedded emissions data (using the template you have filled for this reporting period) and provide it to all your customers who need them for CBAM purposes. 
The template can be found on the European Commission’ s dedicated website for the 
CBAM . It has  been designed based on the rules set out in Annex IV to  the Implementing 
Regulation on the content of the recommended communication from operators of 
installations to reporting declarants. More guidance on compiling relevant information for importers and using the template is given in Section 6.11 of this document and directly 
within the template.  
  
18  
What happens after the transitional period.   
From 2026, the definitive period of the CBAM will apply. That means from 1 January 
2026 onwards, importers will have to bear a “CBAM obligation” in the form of 
certificates, which they purchase at the average price of EU ETS allowances, for every 
CBAM good imported into the EU. There will be a phase -in with increasing coverage 
of embedded emissions by the CBAM obligation from 2026. The full embedded 
emissions will only be covered from 2034 onwards15. 
 
15  The detailed calculation formula will be developed and published by the European Commission at a 
later stage.  
19 4 THE CARBON BORDER ADJUSTMENT MECHANISM  
4.1 Introduction to t he CBAM  
The Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism  (CBAM ) is an environmental policy 
instrument designed to support the EU climate ambitions of achieving a net reduction of 
greenhouse gas (GHG)  emissions  of at least 55% by 2030 and of reaching  climate  
neutrality by 2050 at the latest .  
The CBAM complements the EU Emission Trading S ystem  (EU ETS) , which was recently 
strengthened as part of the EU’s “Fit for 55” legislative package . Under the EU ETS, 
operator s of installations producing emission -intensive  goods surrender emission 
allowances for each tonne of CO 2e emissions. Since an (increasing) amount of these 
allowances are purchased in auctions or on the secondary market, these operator s face a 
‘carbon price’16 on their GHG emissions. However,  most operators in non- EU countries 
do not have such an obligation, and this competitive advantage puts European product ion 
at risk of carbon leakage i.e. relocation outside the EU . 
In order to mitigate the risk of carbon leakage  prior to the CBAM , the relevant industry 
sectors have been receiv ing a part of their allowances free of charge (“free allocation”) 
under the EU  ETS. With the introduction of the CBAM, free allocation is gradually being 
phased out as the CBAM is gradually phased in. Instead  of alleviating the carbon costs for 
EU operator s, the CBAM ensures that importers of goods from non- EU countries bear  
similar carbon costs for the “embedded emissions” of the imported goods. This general 
guiding principle  of both the EU ETS and the CBAM  aims at incentivis ing emissions 
reductions on an equivalent basis between EU operator s and non- EU operator s exporting 
to the EU . 
The CBAM  does not target  countries but the embedded carbon emissions of products 
imported into the EU for specific sectors that are within the scope of the EU ETS and the 
most at risk of carbon leakage . They include namely : cement, iron and steel, aluminium, 
fertilizer s, hydrogen and electricity. It also include s some precursors and some downstream 
products of the afore mentioned sectors  (hereinafter referred to as “CBAM goods”).  For a 
complete list of CBAM goods  per sector see Section 5 of this document. 
The CBAM will be introduced in phases as follows:  
• Transitional period  (1 October 2023 to 31 December 2025):   
Designed as a “learning phase”, during which CBAM importers are required  to 
report a set of data, including emissions embedded in their goods, without paying a financial adjustment  for the embedded emissions. However, penalties may be 
imposed, for example  for failing to submit the required quarterly  CBAM reports . 
• Definitive perio d (starting on 1 January 2026) : 
o From 2026 to 2033, the embedded emissions for CBAM goods  will 
gradually be  covered by the CBAM obligation, as free allocation under 
the EU ETS is gradually phased out.  
 
16  More precisely, a price for the CO 2 or other equivalent greenhouse gas emissions.  
20 o From 2034, 100% of embedded emissions of the CBAM goods will be 
covered by CBAM certificates  and no free allocation will be given under  
the EU ETS for these goods. 
The CBAM in the definitive pe riod is designed to mirror the emission cost under the EU 
ETS:  
• EU operator s will pay the  CO 2 price of the ir emission s and surrender allowances 
(EUAs) under the EU ETS ; and 
• EU importers  of CBAM  goods into the EU will surrender  CBAM certificates t hat 
closely reflect the situation of the EU ET S, both in terms of MRV rules a nd of the 
price of the certificates . 
The CBAM  is designed in compliance with World Trade Organization (WTO) rules and 
other international obligations of the EU and is applied equally to imports from all 
countries outside the EU.17  
This document only deals with the requirements of the transitional period .  
This phase is meant for learning and setting up of the relevant MRV approaches outside the EU, and of institutions and information technology systems within the EU. 
 4.2 Definitions and scope of emissions covered in the CBAM  
The textbox below signposts the key sections in the Implementing Regulation defining 
terms used for the CBAM. 
Implementing Regulation references:  
The CBAM Regulation  (EU) 2023/956, Chapter I Article 3 Definitions and Annex IV Definitions  
Annex II, Section 1 Definitions, sub- section A.1. Definitions.  
A list of abbreviations and definitions used is also provided in annexes in the back of this guidance document.  
 
The following terms are frequent ly used in this guidance document:  
• ‘tonne of CO 2e’ means one metric tonne of carbon dioxide (‘CO 2’), or an amount 
of any other greenhouse gas listed in Annex I to the CBAM Regulation adjusted 
to the equivalent global warming potential of CO 2. 
• ‘Direct emiss ions’  means emissions from the production processes of goods, 
including emissions from the production of heating and cooling consumed during 
the production processes, regardless of the location of the production of the heating and cooling.  
 
17  The only exception are goods from countries that either apply the EU ETS (currently Iceland, Norway 
and Liechtenstein) or have an ETS fully linked with the EU ETS (currently Switzerland). Producers in these countries therefore face the same carbon price as  in the EU.  
21 • ‘Indirect emiss ions’ means emissions from the production of electricity, which is 
consumed during the production processes of goods, regardless of the location of 
the production of the consumed electricity.  
• ‘Embedded emissions’  means emissions released during the product ion of 
goods, including the embedded emissions of relevant precursor materials consumed in the production process.  
• ‘Relevant precursor material’  means a simple or complex good which has 
embedded emissions not equal zero and which is identified as being within the system boundaries for the calculation of embedded emissions of a complex good. 
• ‘Simple goods’  means goods produced in a production proce ss requiring 
exclusively input materials and fuels having zero embedded emissions. 
• ‘Complex goods’  means goods other than simple goods. 
• ‘Specific embedded emissions’  means the embedded emissions of one tonne of 
goods, expressed as tonnes of CO
2e emissions per tonne of goods. 
• ‘Specific embedded emissions’  means the embedded emissions of one tonne of 
goods, expressed as tonnes of CO 2e emissions per tonne of goods. 
• ‘Prod uction process’  means the parts of an installation in which chemical or 
physical processes are carried out to produce goods under an aggregated goods 
category defined in Table 1 of Section 2 of Annex II of the Implementing 
Regulation, and its specified system boundaries regarding inputs, outputs and corresponding emissions. 
• ‘Aggregated goods category’ is implicitly  defined in the Implementing Regulation 
by listing the relevant aggregated goods categories and all the goods identified by 
their CN codes in Table 1 of Section 2 of Annex II.  
• ‘Production route’  means a specific technology used in a production process to 
produce goods under an aggregated goods category. One production process 
usually relates to one group of CBAM goods produced (the ‘aggregated goods categories’).  However, in some case more than one production route exists for 
producing these goods.  
 
4.3 Transitional period  
A summary of key elements of the transitional period is presented in Table 4-1. 
Table 4 -1: Transitional period – key points  
Duration 1 October 2023 to 31 December 2025.  
MRV rules  Implementing Regulation  (EU) 2023/1773.  
Reporting of indirect 
emissions  Required for all CBAM goods. 
22 Default values for 
reporting of embedded emissions  Global values  
(except electricity).  
May be used for precursors of complex goods contributing up to 20% of the total for the complex good.  
Must be used for imports of electricity and for indirect 
emissions, unless certain criteria are met.  
Flexibility regarding MRV rules  The use of rules from other (non- EU) carbon pricing or 
reporting schemes are allowed for operators of installations until the end of 2024, if they cover the same emissions and provide similar accuracy.  
Importers may use other (estimation) methods until 31 July 
2024. 
Frequency of reporting  Quarterly (importers).  
Verification of reported data  Not required.  
Operators and importers should aim to report as accurately and completely as possible.  
If verification has been undertaken this should be noted in the  
submission.  
Surrender of CBAM 
certificates  Not required.  
 
4.3.1 Key reporting roles and responsibilities  
The “reporting declarant”18 is the entity which is responsible for the reporting of 
embedded emissions of imported goods. In principle, the reporting declarant  is the 
“Importer”. However, in practice there are different options depending on the person  
lodging the customs declaration . Where different actors are involved in the importation 
process, it is important to remember that every tonne of imported good is  the responsibility 
of exactly one reporting declarant , i.e. that it is neither reported twice nor omitted from 
reporting.  
In line with the options provided under  the Union Customs Code (UCC19), the reporting 
declarant can be either20: 
• The importer who lodges a customs declaration  for release for free circulation 
of goods in its own name and on its own behalf;  
• The person, hol ding an authorisation  to lodge a customs declaration referred to 
in Article 182(1) of the UCC, who declares the importation of goods; or  
 
18  The Implementing Regulation uses this term in order to cover both situations, either where an importer 
or its indirect customs representative are responsible for the CBAM reporting.  
19  Regulation (EU) No 952/2013, consolidated version: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2013/952/2022- 12-12  
20  Article 2(1) of the Implementing Regulation.  
23 • The indirect customs representative, where the customs declaration is lodged 
by the indirect customs representative appointed in accordance with Article 18 of 
the UCC, when the importer is established outside the Union or where the indirect customs representative has agreed to the reporting obligations in accordance with Article 32 of the CBAM Regulation. 
The reporting dec larant must provide a ‘CBAM report’ on a quarterly basis
21, to the 
European Commission via the CBAM Transitional Registry , no later than one month 
after the end of that quarter. This is to report the information listed in Annex I of the 
Implementing Regulation  on the goods imported into the EU during that quarter. Note 
the specific requirements, including on the date of importation, in case of the so- called 
“inward processing” customs procedure (see section 4.3.5).   
The operator of an installation  producing CBAM goods outside the EU is the second key 
role for the functioning of the CBAM . Installation operators are the persons who have 
direct access to information on the emissions of their installations . They are therefore 
responsible for monitor ing and report ing the embedded emissions of goods  they have 
produced and are exporting to the EU.  
Third -party verifiers  will play an important role in the definitive period. However, during 
the transitional period, verification is a fully voluntary measure which operators of 
insta llations may choose as a means to improve their data quality, and to prepare for the 
requirements of the definitive period. 
Furthermore, the competent authority in the EU Member State where the reporting 
declarant is established plays an important role . It is in charge of enforcing the certain 
provisions of the CBAM Regulation, such as reviewing the CBAM reports  to ensure that 
reporting declarants submit complete and correct  quarterly CBAM reports, and to impose 
penalties in line with the Implementing Reg ulation, if necessary.  
The European Commission (in this document also “ the Commission ”) is responsible for 
running the CBAM Transitional Registry, assessing the overall implementation of the 
CBAM during the transitional period by check ing the information c ontained in the 
quarterly CBAM reports , for further developing the legislation with a view to the definitive 
period, and for co-ordinat ing the competent authorities in the EU Member States. 
Furthermore, the European Commission provides a dedicated website for the CBAM , with 
further guidance documents, templates for reporting, training material, and the portal to 
the CBAM Transitional Registry (which will be further updated to become the CBAM 
Registry in the definitive period).  
 
4.3.2 What needs to be monitored by  you (as an operator)  
The first element is the monitoring of direct emissions  of the installation. However, 
monitoring of an installation’s emissions is only the initial part of determining embedded 
emissions of a product. Whenever an installat ion produces several different products, the 
emissions must also be appropriately attributed to the individual products . Due to the 
specific rules for attributing emissions to goods, there is also a need to determine certain 
flows of heat (steam, hot water , etc.) to and from the installation, and between relevant 
 
21 Article 35 to  the CBAM Regulation  
24 production processes. The same applies to so- called “waste gases” (e.g. blast furnace gas 
in the steel industry). Both heat and waste gases contribute to the direct emissions.  
You must also  monitor  and report to the reporting declarant(s) the quantities of specific 
input materials which themselves have embedded emissions (the so -called “precursors”) 
used in the manufacturing process and determine the embedded emissions of these 
precursor materials . Where you purchase precursors, you need to obtain data on the 
embedded emissions of precursor materials used in the production of the CBAM goods from the supplier of these precursors.  
Indirect emissions  released from the generation of the electricity cons umed during the 
production of all CBAM goods similarly must  be monitored for the purposes of the 
CBAM
22 and attributed to the goods produced. Again, emissions embedded in precursors 
must  be included, where relevant.  
Explanation of how to determine these embedded emissions and to define system boundaries are elaborated upon in Section s 5.2 and 5. 
Finally, you must communicate to the importer(s) the carbon price due  in the 
production of the good within its own jurisdiction, if any . This includes the carbon price 
per tonne CO
2e and the amoun t of free allocation or any other financial support, 
compensation or rebate received per tonne of the product relevant for the CBAM. Notably, in case of complex goods, the carbon costs due by the producers of precursor materials 
should also be taken into a ccount.  
 
4.3.3 Reporting periods for operators and importers  
The reporting period  is the reference period for determining embedded emissions. 
Operators and importers have different reporting periods. 
Installation  operators  
For you (an operator) , the default reporting period is twelve  months to allow them to collect 
representative data that reflects  an installation’s annual operations.  
The twelve- month reporting period may be  either a:  
• Calendar year  – which is the default option for reporting; or alternatively a  
• Fiscal year  – if this c an be justified on the basis that the data for a fiscal reporting 
year is more accurate, or to avoid incurring unreasonable cost; for example, 
where the financial year end coincides with an annual stock take of fuels and materials.  
A period of twelve  months is considered representative as this reflect s seasonal variations 
in an installation’s operations, as well as any periods of disruption to the process resulting  
from planned annual shutdowns (e.g. for maintenance) and start -ups. A full year also helps 
 
22  During the transitio nal period, indirect emissions of all CBAM goods are to be monitored and reported, 
including the embedded indirect emissions of precursors. However, in the definitive period, indirect 
emissions will be included only for certain products (the goods included  in Annex II to the CBAM 
Regulation ). 
25 to mitigate any data gaps  e.g. by taking meter reads on either side of any missing periodic 
data points .  
However, you may also choose an alternativ e reporting period, of a least three months, if 
the installation participates in an eligible MRV system  and the reporting period coincides 
with the requirements of that MRV system. For example :  
• A mandatory carbon pricing scheme ( an emission trading system or carbon tax, 
levy or fee ) or GHG reporting scheme with a compliance obligation. In this case 
that scheme’s reporting period may be used, if it covers at least three months; or  
• Monitoring and reporting for the purpose of a nother monitoring scheme (e.g. a  
GHG emission reduction project, which includes verification by an acc redited 
verifier. In this case the reporting period of the applicable MRV rules may be 
used if it is at least three months.  
In all the above cases, the direct and indirect embedded emissions of goods should be calculated as the average of the reporting per iod chosen.  
In order to allow representative data to be reported from the start of the transitional period, operators should aim to share a full year of data for 2023 in January 2024, with importers, for the first quarterly report. In order to do this, you should:  
• Collect emissions data and activity data from the start of the transitional period, for as much of 2023 as is available. For the period before actual emissions 
monitoring starts
23, you should make estimates based on best available data (e.g.  
by using production protocols, backward calculation based on known correlations between known data and the relevant emissions, etc.).  
• Start to collect data for the last quarter of 2023 in preparation for reporting a full year of data to importers, if poss ible, as early as possible at the start of January 
2024. 
In light of the above, you should therefore start preparing your  monitoring methodology 
as soon as possible and aim to start actual monitoring as soon as possible after 1 October 
2023. You should share your embedded emissions data with importers as soon as th is is 
possible after the end of each quarter.  
Importers  
During the transitional period, t he reporting period for  importers  (“reporting declarants”)  
is quarterly , with  report s due within one mont h. 
• The first quarterly report is  for the period October to December 2023, with the 
report due to be submitted on the CBAM Transitional Registry by 31 January 
2024. 
• The last  quarterly report is  for the period October to December 2025, with the 
report  due to be submitted on the CBAM Transitional Registry by 31 January 
2026. 
The quarterly report should summarise the embedded emissions in goods imported during the previous quarter of the calendar y ear, splitting out direct and indirect emissions, as well 
 
23  This will be the most frequent case, except where an eligible MRV system is already in place.  
26 as any carbon price due outside the EU . For deciding at what date a good was imported, 
the “release to the market ” (i.e. the clearance by the customs authorities) is relevant. This 
is important in p articular for goods put under the “ inward processing ” procedure (see 
section 4.3.5).  
Note that a CBAM report which has already been submitted may s till be corrected24 until 
two months after the end of the reporting quarter. This may be the case, for example, when 
more accurate data on embedded emissions becomes available to the importer after the 
reporting deadline. Acknowledging the difficulty to set up MRV systems in time, the Implementing Regulation allows a longer period for corrections for the first two quarterly reports , which is  until the deadline for the third quar terly report. This means that the reports 
due by 31 January and 30 April 2024 may be  subsequently corrected until 31 July 2024.  
 
4.3.4 Governance of the CBAM  
Figure 4-1: Overview of the reporting responsibilities in the transitional period of the 
CBAM .  
 
For explanation of the numbers (relating to the workflow), please see main text below.
 
As shown schematically in  Figure 4-1, the governance system and workflows in the 
transitional period of the CBAM follow the steps  below  (paragraph numbering follows the 
red numbers in the figure):  
1. The importer (reporting declara nt) receives CBAM goods from various 
installations, possibl y from different countries outside the EU.  
2. For each import, the importer lodges the usual customs declaration. The customs 
authority of the relevant EU Member State checks and clears the import, as usual. 
 
24  Article 9 of the Implementing Regulation Importer 
(reporting 
declarant)European 
Commission
CBAM Transitional 
Registry
Graphic by Competent Authority
Member StatesNon-EU countries
👮  Customs 
authority 2Customs 
declaration 4Import of 
goods
1Installations in various countries
Quarterly reports on 
embedded emissions5
Information of import3Information 
exchange6Request data 
on embedded 
emissionsVerification 
optional
27 3. The customs authority (or the IT system used) informs the European Commission 
(using the CBAM Transitional Registry) of this import. This information can then be used to check the completeness and accuracy of quarterly CBAM reports. 
4. The reporting declarant requests the relevant data on specific embedded emissions of the imported CBAM goods from the operator s (in practice, this may involve 
intermediary traders, who would have to forward the request to the operator of the installation wh ich produced the CBAM goods). The latter  reply by sending the 
requested data, if possible, using the template provided for this purpose by the 
Commission. The data may be voluntarily verified by a third- party verifier.  
5. The reporting declarant is then able to submit the  quarterly CBAM report to the 
CBAM Transitional Registry.  
6. An information exchange between the Commission and the competent authorities in the EU Member States takes place. The Commission informs (based on the customs data), which reporting declarants are expected to submit CBAM reports. Furthermore, t he Commission can perform spot checks of actual reports and check 
their completeness with regards to the customs data. Where irregularities are identified, the Commission informs the competent authorit y of this . The competent 
authority will then follow up, usually by getting in contact with the importer and requesting rectification of the irregularity, or submission of the missing CBAM report. I f the reporting declarant does not correct the mistakes, the compete nt 
authority can ultimately impose a (financial) penalty.  
7. (Not shown in the figure and not required by legislation, but in the own interest of the importer): to avoid similar problems in the future, the importer who received a 
penalty should inform the operator  of the problem (s) identified by the Commission 
or the competent authority in order to address the issue(s) for future submissions. 
 
4.3.5 Inward processing  
The Union Customs Code defines several special procedures. “Inward processing”
25 
means that a good is imported into the EU for processing with suspension of import duties 
and VAT. After the processing operations, the processed products or the original imported 
goods can then be either re- exported or released for free circulation in th e EU . The latter 
would imply the obligation to pay import duty and taxes, as well as the application of commercial policy measures.  
This principle is extended to the CBAM, i.e. no obligation for reporting under the CBAM 
arises in this case. However, if the CBAM good is released to the EU market after inward 
processing, either as the original good or modified, a CBAM reporting obligation arises.  
For goods actually imported after having been put under inward processing, the period 
under which they must be included in the CBAM report starts on the date of release to the internal market ( discharge from  the customs procedures ). For this reason, in some cases 
goods may have to be reported under the CBAM although they were put under inward processing before 1 October 2023.  
 
25  https://taxation -customs.ec.europa.eu/customs -4/customs -procedures -import -and-export -0/what -
importation/inward -processing_en  
28 Article 6 of the Implementing Regulation provides some special reporting requirements 
for goods released for free circulation after inward processing for the purposes of the quarterly CBAM reports:  
• If the good was not modified during the inward processing, the quantities of the 
good and the embedded emissions of those quantities put under inward processing are to be reported. The report shall also include the country of origin and the installations wh ere the goods where produced, if those are known;  
• If the good was modified, the quantities of the original good and the embedded emissions of those quantities put under inward processing are to be reported. The report shall also include the country of origin and the installations where the goods where produced, if those are known;  
• Where the origin of the good used for inward processing cannot be defined,  the 
embedded emissions shall be calculated on the basis of the weighted average embedded emissions of the totality of the goods placed under the inward processing procedure for the same a ggregated good category.  
 
29 5 CBAM  GOODS AND PRODUCTION ROUTES  
This section provides guidance on industry sector specific rules that apply for the 
transitional period, for the cement,  hydrogen, fertilizers, iron and steel and aluminium 
sectors.  It deals with the specification of products covered by the CBAM and the relevant 
production routes. Section  6 explains the monitoring requirements of the CBAM which 
apply to all sectors. Thereafter, section  7 continues with sector -specific details, in 
particular by adding sector -specific monitoring and reporting requirements, and by 
providing elaborated examples for each sector.  
While this guidance document is intended primarily for use by operators who produce 
tangible goods falling under the CBAM, section  7 contains also some information for 
importers of electricity as a good, under the CBAM (section 7.6).  
 
5.1 Foreword to sector specific sections  
The following sections provide an overview of the different production routes for the goods 
listed in Annex I to the CBAM Regulation and provide sector specific guidance.  
Additional information on the production processes of the goods can also be found in the BREF
26 reference documents for best available techniques (BAT).  
Diagrams used in the following sections . 
For the system boundary graphics  presented in the sections below, the following 
conventions  are applied:  
 Production processes (for which monitoring of the direct emissions would take 
place) are shown as rectangles; Materials are shown in boxes with rounded corners.  
 Optional processes (e.g. CCS/CCU) are shown in blue boxes. In particular, CCS/CCU would not be taken into account for developing default values, but where you (as an operator) use them, the related emissions or emission savings should be taken into account for determining actual embedded emissions. 
 Materials which are considered to have no embedded emissions are shown in red boxes, materials with e mbedded emissions ( relevant precursor materials and final 
products, i.e. goods under the CBAM) in green boxes. Simple goods are shown in normal font, complex goods in bold font. 
 Input materials are presented without trying to be complete. This means that t he 
focus is on materials which are relevant for demonstrating the differences between different production routes. As a consequence, less important input materials and in particular fuels are usually omitted in order to keep graphs simple.  
 
26 BAT Reference document  (BRE F), BAT being “Best Available Techniques” as defined by the IED 
(Industrial Emissions Directive). Relevant BREF documents are those for: the production of  cement; for 
iron and steel  production; large volume inorganic chemicals (which includes fertili zers); for Chlor-
alkali; and for n on-ferrous metals (which includes both aluminium  and ferro -alloys ). All BREFs can be 
found at the European IPPC Bureau, under https://eippcb.jrc.ec.europa.eu/reference.  
30  Note: CCS/CCU pr ocesses are indicated in  the following  Figure 5-1 for the 
cement value chain as an example. To keep the graphic s reasonably simple, this is 
not shown in other sectors, but is equally applicable.  
Electricity as input is shown only in cases where it is the main “precursor” of the process 
(i.e. in particular for electric arc furnaces and electrolysis processes).  
  
5.2 Identifying CBAM goods  
This section explains how goods covered by the CBAM are defined and identified in the 
Regulation. The textbox below signposts the key sections for the definition and reporting 
of CBAM goods, relevant for the CBAM transitional period.  
Implementing Regulation references:  
Annex II, Section 2, Table 1  Mapping of CN codes to Aggregated goods categories.  
Annex III, Section F Rules for attributing emissions of an installation to goods.  
 
5.2.1 Product specifications  
The Combined Nomenclature (CN)27,28 classification system defines the essential 
characteristics of goods and is used to identify those sector goods in scope for the CBAM.  
The CN ‘product specification’ classification system comprises two parts, firstly a 
numerical 4, 6 or 8 -digit numbering system, reflecting different levels of product 
disaggregation, and secondly a short text description of each product category giving its essential characteristics.  The first 6 digits are identical to the H armonised System (HS)  
classi fication used in international trade  and the remaining 2 digits are EU -specific 
additions. 
Both parts of the goods’ product specification are given in Annex I to the CBAM 
Regulation, but elsewhere in the text this may also be abridged to the numerical code  only, 
for ease of reference.  
5.2.2 Identifying goods in scope for the CBAM Regulation  
You (as an operator ) should first establish which goods produced by your installation fall 
under the scope of the CBAM. To this end, you should:  
• Draw up a list of all goods and precursors at your installation, both produced at 
your installation and precursors obtained from outside the installation.  
 
27  Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/87 of 23 July 1987 on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and on 
the Common Custom s Tariff (OJ L 256, 7.9.1987, p. 1).  
28  For further information on the CN definitions for goods see the Eurostat RAMON database for 2022 at: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/ramon/nomenclatures/index.cfm?TargetUrl=LST_NOM_DTL&StrNom=
CN_2022  
31 Note that it is possible for the same goods category to be applicable to both the good 
produced and for the precursor used to produce that good. This is relevant for iron and steel, aluminium and fertilizer  sector goods. 
• Check and compare the full range of goods produced against the product 
specifications given in Annex I to the CBAM Regulation. 
• From this comparison, establish which of the listed goods produced by the 
installation are with in the scope of the CBAM . 
 
5.3 Cement sector  
The textbox below signposts sector -specific sections in the Implementing Regulation, 
relevant for the CBAM transitional period.  
Implementing Regulation references:   
• Annex II , Section 2 , Table 1 Mapping of CN codes to aggregated goods categories.  
• Annex II , Section 3 Production routes, s ystem boundaries, and relevant precursors, as specified in 
sub-sections: 3.2  – Calcined clay, 3.3 –  Cement clinker, 3.4 – Cement and 3.5 – Aluminous cement.  
 
5.3.1 Unit of production and embedded emissions for industry sector  
The quantity of declared cement goods imported into the EU should be expressed in metric 
tonnes. You should record the quantity of CBAM good(s) produced by the installation or 
production process(s), for the purposes of reporting. 
Industrial sector Cement  
Production unit of goods  Tonnes (metric), reported separately for each type of CBAM good produced, by the installation or production process in the country of origin.  
Associated activities  Producing cement clinkers and calcined clays, grinding and blending cement clinker to produce cement.  
Relevant greenhouse gas emissions  Carbon dioxide ( CO
2) 
Direct Emissions  Tonnes (metric) of CO 2e  
Indirect Emissions  Quantity of electricity consumed (MWh), source and emissions factor used to calculate the indirect emissions in t onnes (metric) of CO
2 or CO 2e.  
To be reported separately during transitional 
period. 
Unit for embedded emissions  Tonnes CO 2e emissions per tonne of good, 
reported separately for each type of CBAM good, 
by the installation or production process in the country of origin.  
 
32 The cement sector has to account for both direct emissions and indirect emissions, in the 
transitional period . Indirect emissions are to be reported separately. Emissions should be 
reported in metric tonnes of CO 2 equivalent (tCO 2e) emissions, per tonne of good output. 
This figure should be calculated for the specific installation or production process in your country of origin.  
Note that a case study showing how direct and indirect specific embedded emissions 
(SEE) values are derived for the cement production process , and how the embedded 
emissions of imports into the EU are calculated, is given in section 7.1.3. 
The following sections set out how the system bo undaries of cement sector goods should 
be defined and identify elements of the production process es that should be included for 
the purposes of monitoring and reporting.  
 
5.3.2 Definition and explanation of goods covered  
The following Table  5-1 lists the relevant goods in scope for the CBAM transitional period 
in the cement industry sector. The aggregated goods category in the left hand column 
defines groups for which joint ‘production processes’ are to be defined for the purpose of 
monitoring.  
Table 5 -1: CBAM goods in the cement sector  
Aggregated goods category  CN Code  Description  
Calcined clay  2507 00 80 Other kaolinic clays  
Cement clinker 2523 10 00 Cement clinkers29 
Cement  2523 21 00 
 
2523 29 00  
2523 90 00  White Portland cement, whether or not artificially coloured  
Other Portland cement
 
Other hydraulic cements  
Aluminous cement  2523 30 00 Aluminous cement30 
Source: The CBAM Regulation, Annex I; Implementing Regulation, Annex II.  
The aggregated goods categories listed in Table 5-1 include  both finished cement goods 
and precursor goods (intermediate products) that are consumed in the production of cement.  
Only input materials listed as relevant precursors to the system boundaries of the production process as specified in the Implementing Re gulation are to be considered. Table 
5-2 lists the precursors by aggregated goods category and production route.  
 
29  No distinction is  made between different types of clinker, i.e. grey and white cement clinker  are the same 
for the purposes of the CBAM.  
30  Also referred to as ‘Calcium Aluminate Cement’.  
33 Table 5 -2: Aggregated goods categories, their production routes and relevant precursors  
Aggregated Goods Category Relevant precursors   
Production route   
Calcined clay  None  
Cement clinker  None  
Cement  Cement clinker ; calcined clay (if used in the 
process).  
Aluminous cement  None  
 
Precursor goods relevant to the system boundary are ‘cement clinker31’ (CN code 2523 10 
00), which includes both white clinker ( used to make white cement) and grey clinker, and 
‘calcined clay’ (CN code 2507 00 80)32, which  is a clinker substitute and may be used to 
modify the properties of the cement  produced.  
These precursors are defined as simple goods, as the raw material constituents and fuels 
(both fossil fuels and any alternative fuels) used in their manufacture are themselves considered to have zero embedded emissions. 
The finished cement goods listed in Table 5-1 comprise both white Portland cement, grey 
Portland cement , other hydraulic cements and aluminous cement. These goods are defined 
as complex goods  (with the exception of aluminous cement) as they include the embedded 
emissions from precursor goods. Other constituents used in cement manufacture, in particular granulated blast furnace slag, 
fly ash and natural pozzolana that are used in the manufacture of other hydraulic cement goods (including blended or ‘composite’ cements) are not considered to have any embedded emissions and are not in scope for the CBAM.  
Cement sector goods are produced by a number of different process  routes, outlined below. 
 
5.3.3 Definition and explanation of relevant production processes and r outes  
The system boundaries of precursors and cement goods are distinct and may , under certain 
conditions, be added together to include all processes directly or indirectly linked to the 
production processes for these goods, including input activities to the process and output 
activities  from the process .  
The relevant emissions that should be monitored for the cement sector are detailed in section  7.1.1. 
 
31  No distinction is made between grey and white clinker, the operator should apply the relevant embodied 
emissions of the relevant clinker precursor used.  
32  The CN code includes non- calcined  clays too, which are not subject to the CBAM; in this case, the 
quantities of non- calcined clay imported are still reported, but with zero embedded emissions and 
without monitoring requirements for the producer.  
34 5.3.3.1 Calcined clay  production process  
Calcined clay may be used as a clinker substitute. Kaolinic clay that is calcined 
(metakaolin) can be added to cement in place of clinker in varying proportions  in order to modify the properties of the cement mixture.  
The Implementing Regulation (section 3 Annex II) defines the system boundaries for direct 
emissions monitoring of the calcined clay production route , as encompassing:  
“ – All processes directly or indirectly linked to the production processes, such as 
raw material preparation, mixing, drying, and calcining, and flue gas cleaning.  
– CO
2 emissions from the combustion of fuels as well as from raw materials, where 
relevant .” 
There are no relevant precursors  for this production process . Indirect emissions that result 
from electricity consumed by the production process should also be monitored.  
Note that o ther clays falling under CN code 2507 00 80 which are not calcined are assigned 
embedded emissions of zero.  
 
5.3.3.2 Cement c linker production process  
Cement clinker is produced in clinker pla nts (kilns) by the thermal decomposition of 
calcium carbonate to form calcium oxide, followed by the clinkering process in which the 
calcium oxide reacts at high temperatures with silica, alumina and ferrous oxide to form a clinker. Grey and white clinkers  may be produced depending on the temperature of the 
process and purity of raw materials.  
The Implementing Regulation (section 3 Annex II) defines the system boundaries for direct emissions monitoring of the cement clinker production route , as encompassin g:  
“ – Calcination of limestone and other carbonates in the raw materials, 
conventional fossil kiln fuels, alternative fossil- based kiln fuels and raw materials, 
biomass kiln fuels (such as waste -derived fuels), non- kiln fuels, non- carbonate 
carbon content of limestone and shales, or alternative raw materials such as fly ash used in the raw meal in the kiln and raw materials used for flue gas scrubbing.”  
There are no relevant precursors  for this production process . Indirect emissions that result 
from electricity consumed by the production process should also be monitored.  
In line with the above definition of system boundaries, the following production steps may be regarded as being within the system boundaries of cement clinker installations:  
• Raw mater ial preparation – grinding, milling, homogenisation.  
• Fuel storage and preparation – for conventional and waste derived fuels .  
• Clinker production (‘clinker burning’) – all steps for the integrated kiln system 
including preheating, kiln processing and clinker cooling. 
35 • Intermediate storage – storage of cement clinker under cover before export off site 
or cement grinding.  
• Emissions control – for treating releases to air, water or ground.  
The methods  for calculating process emissions from carbonate materials on either an input 
or output basis are given in section 6.5.1.1 of this guidance document . 
An additional rule on the treatment of cement kiln dust (CKD) is given section 7.1.1.2, and 
a case study  showing how  the specific embedded emissions of  cement clinker  are derived 
is given in section 7.1.2. 
 
5.3.3.3 Cement  production process  
Cement (apart from aluminous cement) is defined as a complex good as it is produced from 
relevant precursor s cement clinker and possibly calcined clay .  
Cement is produced in a grinding plant (cement mill), which may be located at the same installation tha t produced the cement clinker, or at a separate standalone plant. Cement 
clinker is ground and blended with certain other constituents to produce the finished cement product. Depending on the mix of different constituents this may be Portland cement, blend ed cement (containing a mix of Portland cement and other hydraulic 
constituents) or other hydraulic cements. 
The Implementing Regulation (section 3 Annex II) defines the system boundaries for direct 
emissions monitoring of the cement production route , as encompassing:   
“ – All CO
2 emissions from fuel combustion, where relevant for drying of 
materials.”  
Relevant p recursors are cement clinker and calcined clay (if used in the process). Indirect 
emissions that result from electricity consumed by the production process should also be 
monitored. 
In line with the above definition of system boundaries , the following production steps may 
be regarded as being within the system boundaries of cement installations: 
• Material preparation – materials ( cement clinker, calcined clay and mineral 
additive s) handling and pre -treatment e.g. preheating and drying mineral additives . 
• Cement production –  all steps, including crushing, grinding, further milling and 
separation by particle size . 
• Cement storage, packaging and dispatch.  
• Emissions control – for treating releases to air, water or ground.  
Figure 5-1 following shows how the  cement clinker and cement production processes 
relate to each other . 
36 Figure 5-1: System boundaries of cement clinker and cement  production processes. 
Cement clinker and cement production processes  
 
  
 
Direct emissions of the cement clinker  production process result from the combustion of 
both kiln and non- kiln fuels and from raw materials  used in the process such as limestone . 
Direct emissions may also result from fuels  used for drying materials used to make the 
final cement product.  
A variation on the clinker production process may be with permanent geological storage 
i.e. carbon capture and sequestration (CCS). 
Note that no distinction is made between grey and white cement clinker used  in the 
production of cement goods. 
 
5.3.3.4 Aluminous cement production process 
Aluminous cement is regarded as a simple good as it is produced directly from aluminous 
clinker by a continuous production process, and is ground without the addition of further additives. 
The Implementing Regulation (section 3 Annex II) defines the system boundaries for direct 
emissions monitoring of the aluminous cement production route, as encompassing:   Alternative raw 
materialsLimestone, clays, 
etcFuels and
alternative fuels
CCS / CCU
processes
ClinkerClinker 
productionCO2
EmissionsCalcined lime, 
dolime , magnesia
System boundaries:
embedded emissions of clinker
(Portland) 
CementGypsum Other constituentsClinker
Cement 
grindingCO2
Emissions
System boundaries:
embedded emissions 
of (Portland) cementCalcined clays

37 “ – All CO 2 emissions from fuel combustion directly or indirectly linked to the 
proce ss. 
 – Process emissions from carbonates in raw materials, if applicable, and flue gas 
cleaning.”  
There are no relevant precursors for this production process. Indirect emissions that result from electricity consumed by the production process should also be monitored.  
In line with the above definition of systems boundaries, the integrated production of 
aluminous cement includes both clinkering and cement grinding production steps, from 
raw material preparation through to emissions control.   
Figure 5- 2: System boundaries of  the aluminous cement production process  
Aluminous cement  production process  
 
  
 
Note that a lumina ( produced from bauxite) is treated as a raw material and has zero 
embedded emissions . 
 5.4 Chemicals sector – Hydrogen  
The textbox below signposts sector -specific sections in the Implementing Regulation, 
relevant for the CBAM transitional period.  
Implementing Regulation references:  
• Annex II , Section 2 , Table 1 Mapping of CN codes to aggregated goods categories.  
• Annex II , Section 3 Production routes, system boundaries, and relevant precursors, as specified in 
sub-section : 3.6 –  Hydrogen, including additional rules for the attribution of emissions in sub-
section 3.6.2.2 Electrolysis of water and sub- section 3.6.2.3 Chlor -Alkali electrolysis.  
 

38 5.4.1 Unit of production and embedded emissions  
The quantity of hydrogen imported into the EU should be expressed in metric tonnes (a s 
pure hydrogen) . As an operator, you should record the quantity of hydrogen produced by 
installation or production process, for the purposes of reporting.  
Industrial sector  Chemicals – Hydrogen  
Production unit of goods  Tonnes (metric) pure hydrogen, reported 
separately by installation or production process in the country of origin
 
Associated activities  Producing hydrogen by steam reforming  or 
partial oxidation  of hydrocarbons, water 
electrolysis, Chlor -Alkali electrolysis  or 
production of sodium chlorate.  
Relevant greenhouse gases  Carbon dioxide ( CO 2) 
Direct Emissions  Tonnes (metric) of CO 2e  
Indirect Emissions  Quantity of electricity consumed (MWh), source and emissions factor used to calculate the indirect emissions in Tonnes (metric) of CO
2 or CO 2e.  
To be reported separately during transitional period. 
Unit for embedded emissions  Tonnes CO 2e emissions per tonne of good, 
reported separately for each type of good, by installation in the country of origin 
 
The hydrogen sector has to account for both direct emissions and indirect emissions in the 
transitional period. Indirect emissions are to be reported separately33. Emissions should be 
reported in metric tonnes CO 2 equivalent (tCO 2e) emissions per tonne of output. This 
figure should be calculated for the specific installation or production process in your 
country of origin.  
Note that several case studies showing how direct and indirect specific embedded 
emissions (SEE) values are derived , for hydrogen produced by the  steam reforming and 
Chlor -Alkali production routes , and how the embedded emissions of imports into the 
EU are calculated, is given in section 7.5.2. 
The following sections set out how the system boundaries of different hydrogen production 
routes should be defined, and identify elements of the production process that should be 
included for the purposes of monitoring and repor ting. 
5.4.2 Definition and explanation of sector CBAM goods covered  
The following Table 5-3 lists the relevant goods in scope for the CBAM transitional period 
in the hydrogen industry sector. The aggregated goods category in the left hand column 
 
33  Note that for this sector indirect emis sions are only reported during the transitional period (and not 
during the definitive period).  
39 defines groups for which joint ‘production processes’ are to be defined for the purpose of 
monitoring.  
Table 5 -3: CBAM goods in the chemicals sector – hydrogen  
Aggregated goods category  Product CN Code  Description  
Hydrogen  2804 10 000  Hydrogen  
Source: The CBAM Regulation, Annex I; Implementing Regulation, Annex II.  
Hydrogen is defined as simple good, as the raw materials and fuels used in its manufacture are considered to have zero embedded emissions. 
There are no relevant precursors  for hydrogen. However, hydrogen may itself be a 
relevant precursor for other processes, where it is separately produced for use as a chemical 
feedstock to produce ammonia, or to produce pig iron or direct reduced iron (DRI) . 
The production of hydrogen is by a number of different process routes, outlined below. 
5.4.3 Definition and explanation of relevant production processes and routes  
Hydrogen can be produced from various feedstocks including plastic wastes, but currently 
it is der ived mostly from fossil fuels. Hydrogen production units are typically integrated 
into larger industrial processes e.g. as for an installation producing ammonia. 
Figure 5- 3: System boundaries of different production routes for hydrogen – overview  
Production routes for hydrogen  – overview  
 
  
 
The system boundaries for direct emissions monitoring for hydrogen include all processes 
directly or indirectly linked to hydrogen production, and all fuels used in the production of 
hydrogen.  
The relevant emissions that should be monitored for the hydrogen sector are detailed in section 7.5.1.1. 
Note that only the production of pure hydrogen or mixtures of hydrogen with nitrogen 
usable in ammonia production shall be considered. Not covered are the production of 

40 synthesis gas or of hydrogen within refineries or organic c hemical installations, where the 
hydrogen is exclusively used within those plants and not used for the production of goods 
under the CBAM Regulation. 
5.4.3.1 Hydrogen – Steam reforming production route  
The natural gas feedstock for this process is converted to carbon dioxide and hydrogen 
through primary and secondary steam reformation. The overall reaction is highly endothermic and process heat is supplied by the combustion of natural gas or other gaseous fuel. Carbon m onoxide produced is almost all  converted to carbon dioxide by the process.  
The Implementing Regulation (section 3 Annex II) defines the system boundaries for direct emissions monitoring for the  steam reforming (or partial oxidation ) production routes, as 
encompassing:   
“ – All processes directly or indirectly linked to hydrogen production, and flue gas 
cleaning. 
–  All fuels used in the hydrogen production process irrespective of their energetic 
or non- energetic use, and fuels used f or other combustion processes including for 
the purpose of producing hot water or steam.”  
There are no relevant precursors for this production process. Indirect emissions that result 
from electricity consumed by the production process should also be monitored.  
In line with the above definition of systems boundaries, the following production steps 
may be regarded as being within the system boundaries of a hydrogen (steam reformation) 
installation:  
• Raw material pre- treatment – natural gas desulphurisation 
• Steam reformation – primary and secondary, H
2/CO generation  
• Shift conversion – carbon m onoxide to carbon dioxide and hydrogen  
• Separation & purification – CO 2 removal, separation processes as present including 
cryogenic, adsorption, absorption, membrane, hydrogenation (methanation)  
• Emissions control – for treating releases to air, water or ground  
The stream of carbon dioxide produced by the steam reforming  process is very pure and is 
separated and captured for further use, e.g. for urea production. A variation on this process 
may be with permanent geological storage i.e. carbon capture and sequestration (CCS).  
A worked example for the calculation of specific embedded emissions for hydrogen 
produced by the steam reforming production route is given in section 7.5.2.1. 
 
5.4.3.2 Hydrogen – Partial oxidation of hydrocarbons (gasification)  production route  
Hydrogen is produced by the partial oxidation (gasification) of hydrocarbons, typically 
from heavy feedstocks such as residual heavy oils or coal and even waste plastics. Carbon monoxide produced by the process is almost all converted to carbon dioxide. 
41 The Implementing Regulation (section 3 Annex II)  defines the system boundaries for direct 
emissions monitoring for the partial oxidation  (or steam reforming) production routes, as 
encompassing:   
“ – All processes directly or indirectly linked to hydrogen production, and flue gas 
cleaning. 
–  All fuels u sed in the hydrogen production process irrespective of their energetic 
or non- energetic use, and fuels used for other combustion processes including for 
the purpose of producing hot water or steam.”  
There are no relevant precursors for this production process. Indirect emissions that result 
from electricity consumed by the production process should also be monitored.  
In line with the above definition of systems boundaries, the following production steps may be regarded as being within the sys tem boundaries of a hydrogen (partial oxidation) 
installation:  
• Air separation unit – to produce the oxygen for the partial oxidation step.  
• Gasification – H
2/CO generation . 
• Synthesis gas clean up – soot and sulphur removal . 
• Shift conversion – carbon m onoxide to carbon dioxide. 
• Separation & purification – CO 2 removal, separation processes including cryogenic 
separation (liquid nitrogen) . 
• Emissions control – for treating releases to air, water or ground.  
The stream of carbon dioxide produced from the pro cess is of high purity and may be  
separated and captured for further use.  
5.4.3.3 Hydrogen – Electrolysis of water production route  
Water electrolysis is a standalone, non- integrated production process  that produces a very 
pure stream of hydrogen gas . Direct emis sions from this process are minimal. Indirect 
emissions result from electricity consumed by the process. Hydrogen produced by 
renewable electricity may become relevant in the future.  
The Implementing Regulation (section 3 Annex II) defines the system bound aries for direct 
emissions monitoring the electrolysis of water production route, as encompassing if 
relevant:   
“ – All emissions from fuel use directly or indirectly linked to the hydrogen 
production process and from flue gas cleaning.”  
There are no relevant precursors for this production process.  
Indirect emissions that result from electricity consumed by the production process also need to be monitored.  Note that where the produced hydrogen has been certified to comply 
with Commission Delegated Regulations (EU) 2023/1184 (1), an emission factor of zero 
42 for the electricity may be used. In all other cases, the rules on indirect embedded emissions 
(Section D of Annex III) shall apply). 
An additional rule giving the  method for attributing e missions to hydrogen produced by 
the electrolysis of water is provided in section 7.5.1.2. 
5.4.3.4 Hydrogen – Chlor -alkali electrolysis ( and production of chlorates ) production 
routes  
Hydrogen is produced as a by -product of the electrolysis of brine, alongside the 
simultaneous production of chlorine and sodium hydroxide. There are three basic chlor -
alkali process techniques: mercury cell, diaphragm cell and the membrane cell. All three 
cell techniques produce hydrogen, which is formed at the cell cathode and which leaves the cell at very high purity. The hydrogen gas produced is  cooled, dried and purified to 
remove water vapour, and other impurities, which ma y in some cases include oxygen, and 
is then compressed and stored or exported off site. 
The Implementing Regulation (section 3 Annex II) defines the system boundaries for direct 
emissions monitoring for the chlor -alkali and production of chlorates producti on routes, as 
encompassing if relevant:   
“ – All emissions from fuel use directly or indirectly linked to the hydrogen 
production process and from flue gas cleaning.”   
There are no relevant precursors for this production process.  
Indirect emissions that result from electricity consumed by the production process also need to be monitored.  Note that where the produced hydrogen has been certified to comply 
with Commission Delegated Regulations (EU) 2023/1184 (1), an emission factor of zero for the electricity may be used. In all other cases, the rules on indirect embedded emissions (Section D of Annex III) shall apply). 
In line with the above definition of system s boundar ies, the following production steps 
may be regarded as being within the system boundaries of a hydrogen (chlor -alkali) 
installation:  
• Electrolysis of brine – brine preparation, electrolysis, generation of hydrogen as a 
by-product and collection. 
• Gas cooling, drying and purification – removal of water vapour, sodium hydroxide, 
salt, chlorine and oxygen from hydrogen gas . 
An additional rule for the method for attributing emissions to hydrogen produced by the 
chlor -alkali process is provided in section  7.5.1.2 and a worked example is given in section 
7.5.2.2.  
 5.5 Fertilizers  sector  
The textbox below signposts sector -specific sections in the Implementing Regulation, 
relevant for the CBAM transitional period.  
43 Implementing Regulation references:  
• Anne x II Section 2, Table 1 Mapping of CN codes to aggregated goods 
categories.  
• Annex II : Section 3 Production routes, system boundaries, and relevant 
precursors, as specified in sub- sections : 3.7 – Ammonia; 3.8 – Nitric acid; 3.9 
– Urea; 3.10 – Mixed fertilizer s. 
 
5.5.1 Unit of production and embedded emissions  
The quantity of declared nitrogen containing fertilizer  sector goods imported into the EU 
should be expressed in metric tonnes. As an operator, you should record the quantity of 
CBAM goods produced by installation or production process, for the purposes of reporting. 
Industrial sector Fertilizers  
Production unit of goods  Tonnes (metric)34, reported separately for each 
type of sector goods, by installation or 
production process in the country of origin  
Associated activities  Producing chemical precursors for nitrogenous fertilizer production, producing nitrogenous fertilizers by physical mixing or chemical reaction, and processing into their final form . 
Relevant greenhouse gas 
emissions  Carbon dioxide ( CO 2) and nitrous oxide (N 2O) 
Direct Emissions   Tonnes (metric) of CO 2e  
Indirect emissions  Quantity of electricity consumed (MWh), source and emissions factor used to calculate the indirect emissions in Tonnes (metric) of CO
2 or CO 2e.  
To be reported separately during transitional period. 
Unit for embedded emissions  Tonnes CO 2e emissions per tonne of goods, 
reported separately for each type of goods, by installation in the country of origin 
 
The fertilizer  industry sector has to account for both direct emissions and indirect 
emissions in the transitional period. Indirect emissions are to be reported separately. 
Emissions should be reported in metric tonnes CO 2 equivalent (tCO 2e) emissions per tonne 
of output. This figure should be calculated for the specific installation or production 
process in your country of origin. 
 
34  For certain goods, the imported quantities need to be converted to standardised tonnes that are 
subsequently used for calculating the CBAM obligation. For exa mple, for nitric acid, hydrous solutions 
of ammonia and nitrogen- containing fertiliz ers, there will be a need to explicitly state the reference 
concentration / nitrogen content (and form of nitrogen).  
44 Note that a case study showing how direct and indirect specific embedded emissions 
(SEE) values are derived for the mixed fertilizer producti on process , and how the 
embedded emissions of imports into the EU are calculated, is given in section 7.3.2. 
The following sections set out how the system boundaries of fertilizer  sector goods should 
be defined, and identify elements of the production process that should be included for the 
purposes of monitoring and reporting.  
5.5.2 Definition and explanation of sector CBAM goods covered  
The following Table 5-4 lists the relevant goods in scope for the CBAM transitional period 
in the fertilizer  industry sector. The aggregated goods category in the left hand column 
defines groups for which joint ‘production processes’ are to be defined for the purpose of monitoring.  
Table 5 -4: CBAM goods in the fertilizer sector  
Aggregated goods 
category  Product CN Code  Description  
Nitric acid  2808 00 00 Nitric acid; sulphonitric acids  
Urea  3102 10 Urea, whether or not in aqueous solution  
Ammonia  2814 Ammonia, anhydrous or in aqueous solution  
Mixed fertilizers  2834 21 00, 3102, 3105 
 - Except 3102 10 
(Urea) and 3105 
60 00 2834 21 00 – Nitrates of potassium 
3102 – Mineral or chemical fertilizer s, 
nitrogenous  - Except 3102 10 (Urea)  
3105 – Mineral or chemical fertilizer s 
containing two or three of the 
fertilising elements nitrogen, 
phosphorus, and potassium; other 
fertilizer s 
- Except: 3105 60 00 – Mineral or 
chemical fertilizer s containing the two 
fertilising elements phosphorus and potassium
35 
Source: The CBAM Regulat ion, Annex I; Implementing Regulation, Annex II.  
The aggregated goods categories listed in Table 5-4 include both the finished nitrogenous 
fertilizer  goods and chemic al precursor goods  (intermediate products) that are consumed 
in the production of fertilizer . 
Only input materials listed as relevant precursors to the system boundaries of the production process as specified in the Implementing Regulation, that are produced for use 
 
35  Only nitrogen (N)  containing fertiliz ers have signif icant embedded emission s, therefore their precursors 
are included in the CBAM.  
45 in chemical fertilizer production, are to be considered36. Table 5-5 below  lists the possible 
precursors by aggregated goods category and production route.  
Table 5-5: Aggregated goods ca tegories, their production routes and possibly relevant precursors  
Aggregated Goods Category Relevant precursors   
Production route   
Ammonia  Hydrogen, if separately produced for use in the 
process37.  
Haber Bosch with steam reforming 
 
Haber Bosch with gasification  
Nitric Acid  Ammonia (as 100% ammonia). 
Urea  Ammonia (as 100% ammonia). 
Mixed fertilizer  If used in the process: ammonia (as 100% ammonia), nitric acid (as 100% nitric acid), urea, mixed fertilizer s (in particular salts containing 
ammonium or nitrate) . 
 
For the production of mixed fertilizer , not all precursors will apply in every case . Note in 
particular that in some instances an aggregated goods category (mixed fertilizer itself) may 
be used as a precursor for its own category, depending on the final formulation of the mixed fertilizer product required.  
The final nitrogenous chemical fertilizer goods produced from the relevant precursors (in bulk in integrated plants) are defined as complex goods as they include the embedded emissions from relevant precursor goods.  
The production of fertilizer  sector goods  is by a number of different process routes, 
outlined below. 
5.5.3 Definition and explanation of relevant production processes and routes  
The system boundaries of chemical precursors and fertilizer s are distinct and may, under 
certain conditions, be added together to include all processes directly or indirectly linked 
to the production processes for these goods, including input activities to the process, and output activities from the process.  
The following Figure 5-4 provides an overview of the different processes and process 
routes for the production of nitrogenous fertilizer and its relevant precursors. 
 
36  Around 80% of all ammonia production is used as a chemical precursor for fertili zer production and 
circa 97% of nitrogen fertili zers are derived from ammonia.  
37  Where hydrogen from other production routes is added to the process, it shall be treated as a precursor 
with its own embedded emissions.  
46 Figure 5-4: System boundaries and value chain for the production of nitrogenous 
fertilizer  and its precursors  – overview  
Production of nitrogenous f ertilizer  and its precursors – overview  
 
  
 
Urea is used as a precursor in mixed fertilizer production but may also be used as a 
convenient fertilizer on its own due to its high nitrogen content. 
Mixed fertilizers comprise all kinds of nitrogen (N) containing fertilizers, including 
ammonium nitrate,  calcium ammonium nitrate, ammonium sulphate, ammonium 
phosphates, urea ammonium nitrate solutions, as well as nitrogen- phosphorus (NP), 
nitrogen-potassium (NK) and nitrogen-phosphorus- potassium (NPK) fertilizers.  
The relevant emissions that should be monitored for the fertilizers sector are detailed in section  7.3.1.1. 
5.5.3.1 Ammonia  – Haber-Bosch with steam reforming production route 
Ammonia is synthesised from nitrogen and hydrogen via the Haber -Bosch process. 
Hydrogen for th e process is obtained in this production route by steam reforming natural 
gas (or biogas)  whilst n itrogen is obtained from the air. The overall reaction is highly 
endothermic and process heat is s upplied by the combustion of natural gas or other gaseous 
fuel. Any carbon monoxide produced is almost all converted to carbon dioxide. 
The Implementing Regulation (section 3 Annex II) defines the system boundaries for direct emissions monitoring for the H aber-Bosch process with steam reforming production route, 
as encompassing:   
“ – All fuels directly or indirectly linked to ammonia production, and materials 
used for flue gas cleaning.  
– All fuels shall be monitored, irrespective of whether used as energetic or non -
energetic input.  – Where biogas is used, the provisions of Section B.3.3 of Annex III shall be 
applied.  – Where hydrogen from other production routes is added to the process, it shall be 
treated as a precursor with its own embedded emissions.” Ammonia 
production (coal)Ammonia (route 
via separate H2)Nitric acid 
productionUrea productionMixed fertilizer 
production
Ammonia
Nitric Acid
Urea
Other materials
incl. P,K 
compounds
Mixed fertilizersMixing / 
granulationAmmonia 
production (gas)
Nitric AcidAmmonia
Ostwald 
process
AmmoniaHydrogen
(various routes)
innovative 
processesAmmonia
CO2
UreaUrea 
production
AmmoniaNatural gas
Haber -Bosch 
processSteam 
reforming
AmmoniaCoal
Haber -Bosch 
processGasification

47 A relevant precursor is separately produced hydrogen, if used in the process. Indirect 
emissions that result from electricity consumed by the production process should also be 
monitored. 
In line with the above definition of system boundaries, the following production steps may  
be regarded as being within the system boundaries of the Haber -Bosch with steam 
reforming  process :   
• Production of hydrogen by steam reforming natural gas or biogas38. 
• Synthesis of ammonia –  from hydrogen and nitr ogen, at high temperature and 
pressure in the presence of a catalyst; ammonia condensation, purification and 
storage (if applicable).  
• Emissions control – for treating releases to air, water or ground.  
The stream of carbon dioxide from the production of amm onia is of high purity and can be 
separated, captured and transferred elsewhere for other uses e.g. for urea production. 
Note that the ammonia produced is reported as 100% ammonia, whether in hydrous or 
anhydrous form.  
5.5.3.2 Ammonia – Haber -Bosch with gasification production route  
With this production route, hydrogen is obtained by the gasification of hydrocarbons, 
typically from heavy feedstocks such as coal, heavy refinery fuels or other fossil feedstock. A synthesis gas containing hydrogen is produced, which has to be purified  before it can be 
used for the next production step. Ammonia is then synthesised from the hydrogen 
produced and from nitrogen obtained from the air, at high temperature and pressure in the 
presence of a catalyst. Any carbon m onoxide produced is almost all converted to carbon 
dioxide. 
The Implementing Regulation (section 3 Annex II) defines the system boundaries for direct emissions monitoring for the Haber -Bosch process with gasification production route, as 
encompassing:   
“ – All fuels di rectly or indirectly linked to ammonia production, and materials 
used for flue gas cleaning. 
– Each fuel input shall be monitored as one fuel stream, irrespective of whether it 
is used as energetic or non- energetic input .  
– Where hydrogen from other production routes is added to the process, it shall be 
treated as a precursor with its own embedded emissions .” 
A relevant precursor is separately produced hydrogen, if used in the process . Indirect 
emissions that result from electricity consumed by the product ion process should also be 
monitored. 
 
38  For process steps see hydrogen sector section 5.4.3.1 above.  
48 In line with the above definition of system boundaries , the following production steps may 
be regarded as being within the system boundaries of the Haber -Bosch with gasification  
process :  
• Production of hydrogen by gasification (partial oxidation)39. 
• Synthesis of ammonia –  from hydrogen and nitrogen, at high temperature and 
pressure in the presence of a catalyst; ammonia condensation, purification and 
storage (if applicable).  
• Emissions control – for treating releases to air, water or ground.  
Note that the ammonia produced is reported as 100% ammonia, whether in hydrous or 
anhydrous  form.  
5.5.3.3 Nitric acid (and sulphonitric acids)  production process  
Nitric acid is mostly produced via the oxidation of ammonia by Ostwald process. Ammonia 
is first oxidised in the  presence of a catalyst to form nitrogen oxide, which is then further 
oxidised to nitrogen dioxide, followed by absorption in water in an absorption tower to 
form nitric acid. The reaction is exothermic and heat and power may be recovered to the process.  
The Implementing Regulation (section 3 Annex II) defines the system boundaries for direct 
emissions monitoring for the nitric acid production route , as encompassing:   
“ – CO
2 from all fuels directly or indirectly linked to nitric acid production, and 
materi als used for flue gas cleaning. 
– N2O emissions from all sources emitting N 2O from the production process, 
including unabated and abated emissions. Any N 2O emissions from the combustion 
of fuels are excluded from monitoring.”  
A relevant precursor is ammonia (as 100% ammonia). Indirect emissions that result from electricity consumed by the production process should also be monitored. 
In line with the above definition of systems boundaries , the following production steps 
may be regarded as being within the system boundaries of the nitric acid process 
production:  
• Raw material preparation – evaporation and filtration of ammonia and process air. 
• Oxidation of ammonia – to nitrogen oxide, all process steps.  
• Further oxidation and absorption – to nitrogen dioxi de and absorption in water to 
form nitric acid, all process steps.  
• Emissions control – for treating releases to air, water or ground.  
Note that nitric acid produced is reported as 100% nitric acid.  
 
39  For process steps see hydrogen sector section 5.4.3.2 above.  
49 5.5.3.4 Urea  production process  
Urea is synthesised by reacting ammonia and carbon dioxide together at high pressure, to 
form ammonium carbamate, which is then dehydrated to form urea.  
The Implementing Regulation (section 3 Annex II) defines the system boundaries for direct emissions mo nitoring for the urea production route , as encompassing:   
“ – CO
2 from all fuels directly or indirectly linked to urea production, and 
materials used for flue gas cleaning. 
– Where CO 2 is received from another installation as process input, the CO 2 
received and not bound in urea shall be considered an emission, if not already 
counted as emission of the installation where the CO 2 was produced, under an 
eligible monitoring, reporting and verification system. ” 
A relevant precursor is ammonia (as 100% ammonia) . Indirect emissions that result from 
electricity consumed by the production process should also be monitored. 
In line with the above definition of systems boundaries , the following production steps 
may be regarded as being within the system boundaries of the urea production process : 
• Raw material preparation – evaporation and filtration of ammonia, CO 2. 
• Production of urea – all process steps, from synthesis to particle formation.  
• Emissio ns control – for treating releases to air, water or ground.  
The ammonia and CO 2 consumed by this production process are usually delivered from  
other  production processes on the same site.  
5.5.3.5 Mixed fertilizer s production process  
A wide range of operations are included in the production of all kinds of nitrogen 
containing mixed fertilizer s (especially ammonium salts and NP, NK and NPK), such as 
mixing, neutralisation40, particle formation (such as by granulation or prilling), irrespective 
of whether only physical mixing or chemical reactions take place.  
The Implementing Regulation (section 3 Annex II) defines the system boundaries for direct 
emissions monitoring for the mixed fertilizer production route , as encompassing:   
“ – CO 2 from all fuels  directly or indirectly linked to fertilizer production, such as 
fuels used in driers and for heating input materials, and materials used for flue gas cleaning.”  
Relevant precursors (if used in the process) are: ammonia (as 100% ammonia); nitric Acid (as 1 00% nitric acid); urea; mixed fertilizers (in particular salts containing ammonium or 
nitrate). Indirect emissions that result from electricity consumed by the production process 
should also be monitored.  
 
40  Nitrogen containing chemical fertiliz ers are produced by the neutralisation of an acid with ammonia to 
form the corresponding ammonium salt. F ertiliz ers produced in this way include ammonium nitrate, 
calcium ammonium nitrate, ammonium sulphate, ammonium phosphates, urea ammonium nitrate.  
50 In line with the above definition of systems boundaries , the following production steps 
may be regarded as being within the system boundaries of the mixed fertilizer production 
process : 
• Raw material preparation.  
• Production of mixed fertilizer  – all process steps.  
• Emissions control – for treating releases to air, water or ground.  
A case study showing how direct and indirect specific embedded emissions (SEE) values 
are derived for mixed fertilizer production process , and how the embedded emissions of 
imports into the EU are calculated, is given in section 7.3.2. 
 5.6 Iron and Steel sector  
The textbox below signposts sector -specific sections in the Implementing Regulation, 
relevant for the CBAM transitional period.  
Implementing Regulation references:  
• Annex II , Section 2, Table 1 Mapping of CN codes to aggregated goods categories.  
• Annex II , Section 3 Production routes, system boundaries, and relevant precursors, as specified in 
sub-sections : 3.11 – Sintered ore; 3.12 – Ferro -manganese, Ferro -chromium, Ferro -nickel; 3.13 – 
Pig iron; 3.14 – DRI; 3.15 –  Crude steel; and 3.16 – Iron or steel products.  
 
5.6.1 Unit of production and embedded emissions  
The quantity of declared iron and steel sector goods  imported into the EU should be 
expressed in metric tonnes. As an opera tor, you should record the quantity of CBAM goods 
produced by your installation in each  production process, for the purposes of reporting.  
Industrial sector Iron and steel  
Production unit of goods  Tonnes (metric), reported separately for each 
type of sector goods, by installation or production process in the country of origin  
Associated activities  Producing, melting or refining iron or steel or ferrous alloys; manufacture of semi -finished 
and basic steel products.  
Relevant greenhouse gas  Carbon dioxide ( CO 2) 
Direct Emissions  Tonnes (metric) of CO 2e  
Indirect Emissions  Quantity of electricity consumed (MWh), source and emissions factor used to calculate the indirect emissions in Tonnes (metric) of CO
2 or CO 2e.  
To be reported separately during transitional period. 
51 Unit for embedded emissions  Tonnes CO 2e emissions per tonne of goods, 
reported separately for each type of goods, by 
installation in the country of origin  
 
The iron and steel sector has to account for both direct em issions and indirect emissions in 
the transitional period. Indirect emissions are to be reported separately41. Emissions should 
be reported in metric tonnes CO 2 equivalent (t  CO 2e) emissions per tonne of output. This 
figure should be calculated for the specific installation or production process in your 
country of origin.  
Note that several case studies showing how direct and indirect specific embedded emissions (SEE) values are derived for iron to steel products , using the mass balance 
method, and how the embedded emissions of imports into the EU are calculated, are given in section  7.2.2. 
The following sections set out how the system boundaries of iron and steel sector goods 
should be defined, and identify elements of the production process that should be included for the purposes of monitoring and reporting. 
5.6.2 Definition and explanation of sector CBAM goods covered  
The following Table 5-6 lists the relevant goods in scope for t he CBAM transitional period 
in the iron and steel industry sector. The aggregated goods category in the left hand column 
defines groups for which joint ‘production processes’ are to be defined for the purpose of monitoring.  
Table 5 -6: CBAM goods in the iron and steel sector  
Aggregated goods category  Product CN Code  Description  
Sintered 
Ore42 2601 12 00 Agglomerated iron ores and concentrates, other than roasted iron pyrites
 
Pig iron  7201 Pig iron and spiegeleisen43 in pigs, blocks or other 
primary forms  
 720544 Some products under 7205 (Granules and powders, of pig iron, spiegeleisen, iron, or steel) may be covered here  
 
41  Note that for this sector indirect emissions are only reported during the transitional period (and not 
during the definitive period).  
42  This aggregated goods category includes all kinds of iron ore pellet production (for sale of pellets as 
well as for dire ct use in the same installation) and sinter production . 
43  Pig iron  containing alloy ferro -manganese.  
44  Only some products of this CN code will qualify as “pig iron”, while other goods of this code are classified as “iron or steel products” 
52 Aggregated 
goods 
category  Product CN Code  Description  
Ferro -
alloy: 
FeMn  7202 1  
 Ferro -manganese (FeMn)  
Ferro-
alloy: FeCr  7202 4  Ferro -chromium (FeCr)  
Ferro-
alloy: FeNi  7202 6 Ferro -nickel (FeNi)  
DRI 7203 Ferrous products obtained by direct reduction of iron 
ore and other spongy ferrous products  
Crude steel  7206, 7207, 7218 and 7224 7206 – Iron and non- alloy steel in ingots or other 
primary forms (excluding iron of heading 7203)  
7207 – Semi -finished products of iron or non- alloy 
steel 
7218 – Stainless steel in ingots or other primary forms; semi- finished products of stainless steel  
7224 – Other alloy  steel in ingots or other primary 
forms; semi- finished products of other alloy steel  
Iron or 
steel products
45  Includes: 7205, 7208-7217, 7219-7223, 7225-7229, 7301-7311, 7318 and 7326 
 7205 – Granules and powders, of pig iron, 
spiegeleisen, iron or steel (if not covered under category pig iron)  
7208 – Flat -rolled products of iron or non- alloy 
steel, of a width of 600 mm or more, hot -rolled, not 
clad, plated or coated  
7209 – Flat -rolled products of iron or non- alloy 
steel, of a width of 600 mm or more, cold- rolled 
(cold -reduced), not clad, plated or coated  
7210 – Flat -rolled products of iron or non- alloy 
steel, of a width of 600 mm or more, clad, plated or coated  
7211 – Flat -rolled products of iron or non- alloy 
steel, of a width of less than 600 mm, not clad, plated or coated  
7212 – Flat -rolled products of iron or non- alloy 
steel, of a width of less than 600 mm, clad, plated or coated  
7213 – Bars and rods, hot -rolled, in irregularly 
wound coils, of iron or non- alloy steel  
 
45  This aggregated goods category includes semi -finished and finished products.  
53 Aggregated 
goods 
category  Product CN Code  Description  
7214 – Other bars and rods of iron or non- alloy 
steel, not further worked than forged, hot -rolled, 
hot-drawn or hot -extruded, but including those 
twisted after rolling  
7215 – Other bars and rods of  iron or non- alloy steel  
7216 – Angles, shapes and sections of iron or non-alloy steel  
7217 – Wire of iron or non -alloy steel  
7219 – Flat -rolled products of stainless steel, of a 
width of 600 mm or more  
7220 – Flat -rolled products of stainless steel, of a 
width of less than 600 mm  
7221 – Bars and rods, hot -rolled, in irregularly 
wound coils, of stainless steel  
7222 – Other bars and rods of stainless steel; angles, shapes and sections of stainless steel  
7223 – Wire of stainless steel  
7225 – Flat -rolled produ cts of other alloy steel, of a 
width of 600 mm or more  
7226 – Flat -rolled products of other alloy steel, of a 
width of less than 600 mm  
7227 – Bars and rods, hot -rolled, in irregularly 
wound coils, of other alloy steel  
7228 – Other bars and rods of other a lloy steel; 
angles, shapes and sections, of other alloy steel; hollow drill bars and rods, of alloy or non- alloy steel  
7229 – Wire of other alloy steel  
7301 – Sheet piling of iron or steel, whether or not drilled, punched or made from assembled elements; welded angles, shapes and sections, of iron or steel  
7302 – Railway or tramway track construction material of iron or steel, the following: rails, check -
rails and rack rails, switch blades, crossing frogs, point rods and other crossing pieces, sleepers (cro ss-
ties), fish - plates, chairs, chair wedges, sole plates 
(base plates), rail clips, bedplates, ties and other material specialised for jointing or fixing rails  
7303 – Tubes, pipes and hollow profiles, of cast iron 
7304 – Tubes, pipes and hollow profiles, seamless, 
of iron (other than cast iron) or steel  
54 Aggregated 
goods 
category  Product CN Code  Description  
7305 – Other tubes and pipes (for example, welded, riveted or similarly closed), having circular cross -
sections, the external diameter of which exceeds 406,4 mm, of iron or steel  
7306 – Other tubes, pipes a nd hollow profiles (for 
example, open seam or welded, riveted or similarly closed), of iron or steel  
7307 – Tube or pipe fittings (for example, couplings, elbows, sleeves), of iron or steel  
7308 – Structures (excluding prefabricated buildings of heading 9406) and parts of structures (for example, bridges and bridge -sections, lock-  gates, 
towers, lattice masts, roofs, roofing frameworks, doors and windows and their frames and thresholds for doors, shutters, balustrades, pillars and columns), of iron or steel ; plates, rods, angles, 
shapes, sections, tubes and the like, prepared for use in structures, of iron or steel  
7309 – Reservoirs, tanks, vats and similar containers for any material (other than compressed or liquefied gas), of iron or steel, of a capacity exceeding 300 l, whether or not lined or heat -insulated, but not fitted 
with mechanical or thermal equipment 
7310 – Tanks, casks, drums, cans, boxes and similar 
containers, for any material (other than compressed 
or liquefied gas), of iron or steel, of a c apacity not 
exceeding 300 l, whether or not lined or heat -
insulated, but not fitted with mechanical or thermal equipment  
7311 – Containers for compressed or liquefied gas, of iron or steel  
7318 – Screws, bolts, nuts, coach screws, screw hooks, rivets, cotters, cotter pins, washers (including spring washers) and similar articles, of iron or steel  
7326 – Other articles of iron or steel  
Source: The CBAM Regulation, Annex I; Implementing Regulation, Annex II.  
 
The aggregated goods categories listed  in Table 5-6 include both finished goods and 
precursor goods (intermediate products) that are consumed in the production of iron or 
steel products. Only input materials listed as relevant precursors to th e system boundaries 
of the production process as specified in the Implementing Regulation are to be considered. 
Table 5-7 below lists the possible prec ursors by aggregated goods category and production 
route. 
55 Table 5-7: Aggregated goods categories, their production routes and possibly relevant precursors  
Aggregated Goods Category Relevant precursors   
Production route   
Sintered Ore  None  
Ferro alloys (FeMn, FeCr, FeNi)  Sintered ore , if used in the process . 
Pig iron Hydrogen, sintered ore, ferro  alloys, pig iron/ DRI 
(the later if obtained from other installations or 
production processes and used in the process).   
Blast furnace route   
Smelting reduction 
Direct Reduced Iron  (DRI)  Hydrogen, sintered ore, ferro  alloys, pig iron/ DRI  
(the latter if obtained from other installations or 
production processes and used in the process).  
Crude steel  Ferro alloys, pig iron, DRI, c rude steel  (the latter if 
obtained from other installations or production 
processes and used in the process).   
Basic oxygen 
steelmaking   
Electric arc furnace  
Iron or steel products  Ferro alloys, pig iron, DRI, crude  steel, iron  or steel 
products  (if used in the process).  
 
Not all precursors  will apply in e very case. F or example, hydrogen may only become 
relevant in the future.  
Note in particular that in some cases an aggregated goods category may be precursor for 
its own category. This is best explained by an example:  
Example : If an installation produces screws and nuts from steel rods, then the rods are 
the precursor, but both rods and screws and nut s are included in the same aggregated 
goods category.  
The embedded emissions of the screws and nuts will be composed of the emissions of 
the production process (heat applied for making the rods workable, and for annealing of 
the final product) plus the embedded emissions of the steel rods. Note that this is 
important because the mass of the precur sor rods and the mass of the final product  
screws and nut s will not be the same – if e.g. 20% of the original mass are cut away (and 
disposed of as scrap), 100 t precursor are required for 80 t of final product.  
 
Some types of iron or steel product have been excluded from the scope of the CBAM. In 
particular, t hese include certain other types of ferro alloys under CN 7202 and CN 7204 – 
ferro scrap.  
The production of iron and steel sector goods is by a number of diffe rent process routes, 
outlined below. 
56 5.6.3 Definition and explanation of relevant production processes and emissions 
covered  
The system boundaries of precursors and basic iron and steel finished goods are distinct 
and may , under certain conditions, be added together to include all processes directly or 
indirectly linked to the production processes for these goods, including input activities to 
the process, and output activities from the process  (see section 6.3) . 
The following diagram illustrates the different routes by which iron or steel products may 
be produced.  
Figure 5-5: System boundaries and value chain for the production of  iron or steel products.  
Production of iron or steel products – overview  
 
  
 
The production of precursor and finished goods is by a number of  different process routes, 
outlined in the following sections. The relevant emissions that should be monitored for the 
iron and steel sector are detailed in section 7.2.1.1. 
5.6.3.1 Sintered ore production process  
This aggregated goods category includes all kinds of iron ore pellet production (for sale of 
pellets as well as for direct use in the same installation) and sinter production. Pelletisation  
and sintering are complementary process routes for preparing  and agglomerat ing iron 
oxide raw materials for use in iron and steel making. In pelletisation, iron oxide raw materials are ground and combined with additives to form pellets, which are then thermally  
treated. In sinter ed ore production, iron oxide raw materials are mixed with coke breeze 
and other additives before  the mixture is sintered together in a kiln, forming a porous 
material similar to clinker, called ‘sinter’.  Sinter is typically produc ed and used at the 
steelworks . Pellets may be produced at the steelworks or at a distance at mine sites . 
Note that ferro -alloy pellets and sinter produced from iron ores may also be covered by 
this production process (for CN code 2601 12 00).  

57 The Implement ing Regulation (section 3 Annex II) defines the system boundaries for direct 
emissions monitoring for the sintered ore production route, as encompassing:   
“ – CO 2 from process materials such as limestone and other carbonates or 
carbonatic ores . 
– CO 2 from all fuels including coke, waste gases such as coke oven gas, blast 
furnace gas or converter gas; directly or indirectly linked to the production 
process, and materials used for flue gas cleaning.”  
There are no relevant precursors for this production process . Indirect emissions that result 
from electricity consumed by the production process should also be monitored.  
In line with the above definition of systems boundaries , the following production steps 
may be regarded as being within the sys tem boundaries of  iron ore pellet and sinter 
production:  
• Raw material handling and pre -treatment – drying and grinding of iron ore raw 
materials .  
• Blending and mixing of raw materials – preparation of raw mixture for pellets and 
for sinter.  Storage of raw mix in bunkers or hoppers at the start of the process. 
• Iron ore pellets only – forming into pellets and  thermal treatment, screening. 
• Sintered ore only – raw material preparation, sintering in a furnace, followed by 
crushing, screening , conveying and cooli ng. 
• Emissions control – in particular  waste gas treatment . 
The following Figure 5-6 shows the system boundaries of  the sinter ( or iron ore pellets ) 
production process . 
Figure 5- 6: System boundaries of the  sinter ed ore production process  
Sintered ore  production process  
 
  

58 5.6.3.2 Ferro -alloy FeMn, FeCr, and FeNi  production processes  
This process covers the production of the alloys ferro- manganese (FeMn), ferro -chromium 
(FeCr), ferro -nickel (FeNi), identified under CN codes 7202 1, 7202 4 and 7202 6. Other 
iron materials with significant alloy content such as spiegeleisen are not covered  here (see 
section 5.6.3.3) . However, nickel pig iron (NPI) is included if the nickel content is greater 
than 10%; otherwise, if less than 10% NPI is covered by the pig iron – blast furnace 
production route.  
The different ferro -alloys are produced by reductive smelting with the addition of a 
reducing ag ent such as coke to the EAF, along with other additives. D ifferent types of EAF 
may be  used, depending on the ferro- alloy production process ; Ferro -nickel has an 
additional calcination and pre -reduction production step prior to smelting. Following EAF 
smel ting, liquid metal alloy is tapped and cast in moulds and the solidified metal is then 
crushed or granulated, depending on customer requirements.  
The Implementing Regulation (section 3 Annex II) defines the system boundaries for direct 
emissions monitoring for ferro -alloys FeMn, FeCr and FeNi pig iron production processes, 
as encompassing:   
“ – CO 2 emissions caused by fuel inputs, irrespective of whether they are used for 
energetic or non- energetic use.  
– CO 2 emissions from process inputs such as limestone and from flue gas cleaning.   
– CO 2 emissions from the consumption of electrodes or electrode pastes .  
– Carbon remaining in the product or in slags or wastes is taken into account by 
using a mass balance method in accordance with Section B.3.2 of Annex III.”  
A relevant precursor is sintered ore (if used in the process). Indirect emissions that result 
from electricity consumed by the production process should also be monitored.  
In line with the above definition of systems boundaries , the following production steps 
may be regarded as being within the system boundaries of  ferro -alloy installations: 
• Raw material handling and pre -treatment – pellets and sinter for FeMn and FeCr, 
calcination and pre -reduction in a rotary kiln for FeNi. 
• EAF process – all steps for the EAF process, including charging, melting, 
primary refining and tapping of the primary furn ace. 
• Decarburisation and secondary metallurgy – if required to produce ferro- alloys 
with different carbon contents. 
• Casting plant – including casting and cutting, casting ingots pre -heating stands . 
• Crushing and granulation. 
• Emissions control – for treating releases to air, water or ground, including dedusting units, post -combustion unit, slag handling. 
The following Figure 5-7 shows the s ystem boundaries of the relevant ferro -alloy 
production processes.  
 
59 Figure 5-7: System boundaries of Ferro -alloy production processes . 
Ferro -alloy  production process – EAF reductive smelting  
 
  
 
Note that raw material inputs for ferro -alloys may include pellets and sinter that are 
produced under the separate production process (for CN code 2601 12 00) for sintered iron 
ore.  
The mass balance method is used to give a complete balance of the amount of carbon 
entering or leaving (carbon remaining in steel, in wastes or in slag) the EAF production 
process. A case study  showing how  the mass balance method is applied is given in section 
7.2.2.2. 
 
5.6.3.3 Pig iron – Blast furnace production route 
The blast furnace production route produces liquid pig iron (“ hot metal ”) that may be 
alloyed (e.g. spiegeleisen and nickel pig iron or NPI46) or non- alloyed . The main 
production unit for this production process is the blast furnace. Inputs into the blast furnace 
include iron ore pellets or sintered ore , fuels and other raw materials  including those use d 
as reducing agents . Inside the blast furnace iron oxide is reduced to iron metal. The hot 
metal produced is then tapped and is either cast , or is directly converted to crude steel in a 
sequential step by the basic oxygen converter. This step is covered under a different 
production process, the crude steel – basic oxygen steel making production route. 
The Implementing Regulation (section 3 Annex II) defines the system boundaries for direct emissions monitoring for the pig iron – Blast furnace production route, as encompassing:   
“ – CO
2 from fuels and reducing agents such as coke, coke dust, coal, fuel oils, 
plastic wastes, natural gas, wood wastes, charcoal, as well as from waste gases such as coke oven gas, blast furnace gas or converter gas. 
– Where biomass is used, the provisions of Section B.3.3 of Annex III shall be taken 
into account. 
 
46   NPI is covered by this production process if the nickel content is lower than 10% , otherwise if more than 
10% it is covered under the ferro- alloy production process.  Electric arc (or 
other) furnaceCO2
Emissions
System boundaries:
embedded emissions
of ferro -alloys (generic)Ferro AlloyAluminiumSinter or pelletsCoke Silicon or FeSi
Lime, other 
additives
Waste gases
to other processes 
and power plantElectrodes

60 – CO 2 from process materials such as limestone, magnesite, and other carbonates, 
carbonatic ores; materials for flue gas cleaning. 
– Carbon remaining in the pr oduct or in slags or wastes is taken into account by 
using a mass balance method in accordance with Section B.3.2 of Annex III.”  
Relevant precursors (if used in the process) are: sintered ore; pig iron or DRI from other 
installations or production processe s; ferro -alloys FeMn, FeCr, FeNi; and hydrogen, if 
used. Indirect emissions that result from electricity consumed by the production process 
should also be monitored. 
In line with the above  definition of systems boundaries , the following production steps 
may be regarded as being within the system boundaries of blast furnace installations: 
• Raw material handling and pre -treatment.  
• Fuel storage and preparation – e.g. coal drying and preparation for pulverized coal 
injection (PCI), vessels preheating stands.  
• Hot metal production – all steps for the blast furnace process resulting in liquid 
pig iron, the main unit being the Blast furnace, along with hot metal treatment 
units, blast furnace blowers, blast furnace hot stoves, c ompressed air production, 
steam injection in the blast furnace unit, s team generation plant, etc.  
• Emissions control  – for treating releases to air, water or ground, including s lag 
treatment, waste gas treatment, dedusting units, dust briquetting. 
• Miscellan eous not covered above.  
The following Figure 5-8 shows the system boundar y for the blast furnace production 
route . 
If all the liquid pig iron from the blast furnace was used by the oxygen steelmaking process 
to produce crude steel, then there would be no need to monitor emissions from the blast furnace production route separately. Instead, a joint production process for crude steel making may be defined.  
The mass balance method is used to give a complete balance of the amount of carbon 
entering or leaving (carbon remaining in the product, or in wastes or slags) the production 
process. A case study showing how  the mass balance method is applied is given in section 
7.2.2.1. 
 
61 Figure 5- 8: System boundaries of the Pig ir on – Blast furnace production route .  
Pig iron  – Blast furnace production route  
 
  
 
 
5.6.3.4 Pig iron – Smelting reduction production route  
Smelting reduction produces pig iron from precursor sintered ore, iron ore pellets , or 
ironmaking residues, using different fuels and reducing agents. The process comprises two 
steps, the reduction of iron ore followed by melting to produce liquid pig iron / hot metal.  
The Implementing Regulation (section 3 Annex II) defines the system boundaries for direct 
emissions monitoring for the pig iron – smelting reduction production route, as 
encompassing:   
“ – CO 2 from fuels and reducing agents such as coke, coke dust, coal, fuel oils, 
plastic wastes, natural gas, wood wastes, charcoal, waste gases from the process 
or converter gas, etc . 
– Where biomass is used, the provisions of Section B.3.3 of Annex III shall be taken 
into account . 
– CO 2 from process materials such as limestone, magnesite, and other carbonates, 
carbonatic ores; materi als for flue gas cleaning. 
– Carbon remaining in the product or in slags or wastes is taken into account by 
using a mass balance method in accordance with Section B.3.2 of Annex III.”  
Relevant precursors (if used in the process) are: sintered ore ; pig iron or DRI from other 
installations or production processes; ferro- alloys FeMn, FeCr, FeNi ; and hydrogen, if 
used. Indirect emissions that result from electricity consumed by the producti on process 
should also be monitored. 
In line with the above definition of systems boundaries , the following production steps 
may be regarded as being within the system boundaries of smelting reduction installations:  

62 • Raw material handling and pre -treatment.  
• Fuel storage and preparation . 
• Smelting reduction process – all steps for the smelting process, resulting in hot 
metal . 
• Casting plant . 
• Emissions control – in particular flue gas cleaning.  
The following Figure 5-9 shows the system boundaries of the smelting reduction process 
for producing pig iron.  
 
Figure 5- 9: System boundaries of the Pig iron – smelting reduction production route.  
Pig iron  – Smelting reduction production route  
 
  
 The mass balance method is used to give a complete balance of the amount of carbon 
entering or leaving ( as carbon remaining in the  product, or in wastes or  slags) the 
production process. A case study  showing how  the mass balance method  is applied is 
given in section 7.2.2.1. 
5.6.3.5 Direct Reduced Iron (DRI) production process  
Direct reduction involves the production of solid primary iron from high grade iron ores 
(pellets, sinter or concentrates) . There are different technologies that may use different 
qualities of ores (which may require pelletisation or sintering) and different fuels and 
reducing agents (natural gas, diverse fossil fuels or biomass, hydrogen) . The solid product 
is called direct reduced iron (DRI) . Different types of DRI are produced, for example  ‘iron 
sponge’ and hot briquetted iron (HBI). Some DRI is used directly as a feedstock in EAFs 
or for other downstream processes. It is expected that production routes using hydrogen 
will play a major role in decarbonising the steel industry in coming years.  

63 The Implementing Regulation (section 3 Annex II) defines the system boundaries for direct 
emissions monitoring for the DRI production route, as encompassing:   
“ – CO 2 from fuels and reducing agents such as natural gas, fuel oils, waste gases 
from the process or converter gas, etc . 
– Where biogas or other forms of biomass are used, the provisions of Section B.3.3 
of Annex III shall be taken into account . 
– CO 2 from proc ess materials such as limestone, magnesite, and other carbonates, 
carbonatic ores; materials for flue gas cleaning. 
– Carbon remaining in the product or in slags or wastes is taken into account by 
using a mass balance method in accordance with Section B.3.2 of Annex III.”  
Relevant precursors (if used in the process) are: sintered ore; hydrogen; pig iron or DRI 
from other installations or production processes; and ferro -alloys FeMn, FeCr, FeNi, if 
used. Indirect emissions that result from electricity consume d by the production process 
should also be monitored. 
In line with the above definition of systems boundaries , the following production steps 
may be regarded as being within the system boundaries of  DRI  installations: 
• Raw material handling and pre -treatmen t. 
• Fuel storage and preparation – coal, natural gas or hydrogen etc.  
• Direct reduction process for iron production – all steps for the DRI process, 
forming into hot briquetted iron (HBI) if applicable. 
• Emissions control – in particular flue gas cleaning . 
The following Figure 5-10 shows  the system boundaries of the relevant processes for DRI 
production. Although there are several different processes used in practice, the high- level 
system boundaries are very similar and can therefore be represented on a single diagram.  
Note that where an installation does not sell or transfer DRI produced to other installations, there is no need to monitor emissions from the DRI producti on process separately. A 
common production process including steelmaking may be used.  
The mass balance method is used to give a complete balance of the amount of carbon entering or leaving (as carbon remaining in the product, or in wastes or slags) the production process. A case study showing how the mass balance method is applied is 
given in section 7.2.2.1. 
 
64 Figure 5- 10: System boundaries of the DRI production process  
DRI production process   
 
  
 
 
5.6.3.6 Crude steel – Basic oxygen steelmaking  production route  
If the basic oxygen steelmaking production route starts with hot metal (liquid pig iron) ; the 
hot metal is directly converted to crude steel by the basic oxygen converter or furnace 
(BOF) as part of a continuous process. Following the converter, a steel decarburisation 
process by argon oxygen decarburisation (AOD) or vacuum oxygen decarburisat ion 
(VOD) may be performed, followed by various secondary metallurgical processes such as vacuum degassing to remove dissolved gases. Crude steel is then cast into its primary forms by continuous casting or ingot casting, which may be followed by hot -rolling or 
forging to obtain the  semi -finished crude steel products  (under CN codes 7207, 7218 and 
7224) . 
The Implementing Regulation (section 3 Annex II) defines the system boundaries for direct emissions monitoring for the Crude steel – basic oxygen production route, as 
encompassing:   
“ – CO
2 from fuels such as coal, natural gas, fuel oils, waste gases such as blast 
furnace gas, coke oven gas or converter gas, etc.  
– CO 2 from process materials such as limestone, magnesite, and other carbonates, 
carbonatic ores ; materials for flue gas cleaning.”  
– Carbon entering the process in scrap, alloys, graphite etc. and carbon remaining 
in the product or in slags or wastes is taken into account by using a mass balance method in accordance with Section B.3.2 of Annex III.”  
Relevant precursors (if used in the process) are: pig iron, DRI; ferro- alloys FeMn, FeCr, 
FeNi; and crude steel from other installations or production processes, if used. Indirect emissions that result from electricity consumed by the production process should also be monitored. 

65 In line with the above definition of systems boundaries, the following production steps 
may be regarded as being within the system boundaries of basic oxygen steelmaking 
installations : 
• Basic oxygen converter or furnace (BOF). 
• Decarburisation – AOD or VOD processes, where relevant.  
• Secondary metallurgy and vacuum degassing. 
• Casting plant – continuous casting or ingot casting, preheating equipment. 
• Hot rolling or forging – where relevant, only primary hot- rolling and rough 
shaping by forging to obtain the semi-finished products. 
• All necessary auxiliary activities – such as transfers, re -heating.  
• Emissions control – in particular flue gas cleaning, dedusting units, slag handling. 
Note that only primary hot -rollin g and rough shaping by forging to obtain the semi -finished 
products under CN codes 7207, 7218 and 7224 are included in this aggregated goods category. All other rolling and forging processes are included in the aggregated goods category “iron or steel products”.  
 
Figure 5-11: System boundaries of basic oxygen steelmaking and related processes.  
Crude s teel – Basic oxygen steelmaking alongside other related activities  
 
  
 In integrated steel plants, liquid pig iron that is directly charged to the oxygen converter is 
the product which separates the production process for pig iron (bottom left in Figure 5-11 above) from the production process of crude steel (bottom right, above). 
The integrated blast furnace / basic oxygen furnace (BF/BOF) steelmaking process is by 
far the most complex steel making process and is characterised by networks of 
interdependent material and energy flows between the various production units. Note that  
coke (top left) is treated as a raw material with no embedded emissions.  Optional: 
further fuelsCoal
Coke oven gas,
Coke finesCoke ovensCO2
Emissions
System boundaries:
embedded emissions 
of cokeCoke
to other processesSinter plantCO2
Emissions
System boundaries:
embedded emissions 
of sinter (can be applied 
also to iron ore pellets )SinterOptional: 
further fuelsCoal Coke fines* Lime
* Fines as residues from an 
integrated coke plant are 
considered having zero 
embedded emissions, as is 
purchased coke.
Blast furnaceCO2
Emissions
System boundaries:
embedded emissions
of pig iron
(blast furnace route)Pig ironOptional: 
Iron oresCoke Sinter or pellets Lime
Optional: Coal, oil, 
alternative reductants 
Blast furnace gas
to other processes 
and power plantSteel making
(converter)CO2
Emissions
System boundaries:
embedded emissions
of crude steel
(basic oxygen converter route)Crude steelOxygen, additives Pig iron Steel scrap Lime
Converter gas
to other processes 
and power plant

66 When  all the liquid pig iron from  the blast furnace i s used by the oxygen steelmak ing 
process to produce  crude steel, there is  no need to monitor emissions from the blast furnace 
production route separately. Instead , a joint production process for crude steel making may 
be defined.  
The mass balance method is used to give a complete bal ance of the amount of carbon 
entering or leaving (carbon remaining in steel product, or in wastes and slags) the 
production process.  
A case study  of how the  mass balance method is applied for this production route is given 
in section 7.2.2.1. 
 
5.6.3.7 Crude steel – EAF stee lmaking production route  
The direct smelting of materials which contain iron is usually performed in an electric arc 
furnace (EAF). Feedstocks for EAF routes are metal lic iron ; in particular ferrous scrap47 
and/or Direct Reduced Iron (DRI). Where significant amounts of DRI are used, one of the various EAF -DRI routes applies. Following EAF smelting, a steel decarburisation process 
by argon oxygen decarburisation (AOD) or vacuum oxygen decarburisation (VOD) ma y 
be performed, followed by various secondary metallurgical processes such as 
desulphurisation and vacuum degassing to remove dissolved gases. Electricity is the main 
energy input to the EAF.  
The Implementing Regulation (section 3 Annex II) defines the system boundaries for direct emissions monitoring for the Crude steel – EAF production route, as encompassing:   
“ – CO
2 from fuels such as coal, natural gas, fuel oils, as well as from waste gases 
such as blast furnace gas, coke oven gas or converter gas . 
– CO 2 from the consumption of electrodes and electrode pastes . 
– CO 2 from process materials such as limestone, magnesite, and other carbonates, 
carbonatic ores; materials for flue gas cleaning. 
– Carbon entering the process, e.g. in the form of scrap, alloy s and graphite, and 
carbon remaining in the product or in slags or wastes is taken into account by 
using a mass balance method in accordance with Section B.3.2 of Annex III.”  
Relevant precursors (if used in the process) are: pig iron, DRI; ferro- alloys FeM n, FeCr, 
FeNi; and crude steel from other installations or production processes , if used . Indirect 
emissions that result from electricity consumed by the production process are also to be 
monitored. 
In line with the above definition of systems boundaries , the following production steps 
may be regarded as being within the system boundaries of EAF steelmaking installations  
– all relevant activities and production units, such as : 
• Raw material handling and pre -treatment – scrap drying and pre -heating of raw 
mate rials.  
 
47  Where only post -consumer scrap is used, it is assumed to have zero embedded emissions  
67 • EAF process  – all steps for the EAF process, including charging, melting, 
primary refining and steel and slag tapping of the primary furnace. 
• Decarburisation – AOD or VOD processes, where relevant.  
• Secondary metallurgy and vacuum degassing. 
• Casting plant – continuous casting  or ingot casting, preheating equipment. 
• Hot rolling or forging – where relevant, only primary hot-rolling and rough 
shaping by forging to obtain the semi-finished products. 
• All necessary auxiliary activ ities – such as transfers, heating of equipment, re-
heating. 
• Emissions control – in particular flue gas cleaning, dedusting units, slag handling.  
Note that only primary hot -rolling and rough shaping by forging to obtain the semi -finished 
products under CN codes 7207, 7218 and 7224 are included in this aggregated goods 
category. All other rolling and forging processes are included in the aggregated goods category “iron or steel products”. 
 Figure 5-12: System boundaries of the Crude steel – EAF steelmaking production route. 
Crude steel – EAF alloy and non -alloy steel  production route  
 
 
  
 EAF (electric 
arc furnace)CO2
Emissions
System boundaries:
embedded emissions
of crude steel
(EAF route)Crude steelOptional: Other 
materials and fuels
Electricity*
*Electricity is mentioned here 
explicitly as it is the main 
energy input to the process.Scrap Electrodes LimeDRI 
(various routes)
EAF (electric 
arc furnace) 
& AOD / VODCO2
Emissions
System boundaries:
embedded emissions
of crude alloy steel
(EAF route)Crude alloy steelOptional: Other 
materials and fuels
Electricity*
*Electricity is mentioned here 
explicitly as it is the main 
energy input to the process.Scrap Electrodes LimeAlloy components 
(FeNi, FeCr,
FeMn)
Pig iron, 
DRI, NPI

68 There are several different EAF production routes, for crude steel and crude alloy steel, 
which are broadly similar and are shown jointly in Figure 5- 12.  
The mass balance method is used to give a complete balance of the amount of carbon entering or leaving (carbon remaining in steel, in wastes and in slag) the EAF production process.  
A case study showing how the mass balance method is applied for this  production route 
is given in section 7.2.2.2. 
 
5.6.3.8 Iron or steel products  production process  
Iron or steel products are produced from the further processing of crude steel , semi -finished 
products , as well as other final steel products  by all kinds of forming and finishing steps , 
including: re -heating, re -melting, casting, hot rolling, cold rolling, forging, pickling, 
annealing, plating, coating, galvanizing, wire  drawing, cutting, welding, finishing.  
The Implementing Regulation (section 3 Annex II) defines the system boundaries for direct 
emissions monitoring for the iron or steel products production route, as encompassing:   
“ – All CO
2 emissions from combustion of fuels and process emissions from flue 
gas treatment, related to production steps applied at the installation, including, but 
not limited to: re -heating, re -melting, casting, hot rolling, cold rolling, forging, 
pickling, anneal ing, plating, coating, galvanizing, wire drawing, cutting, welding 
and finishing of iron or steel products.”  
Relevant precursors (if used in the process) are: crude steel; pig iron, DRI; ferro -alloys 
FeMn, FeCr, FeNi; and other iron or steel products. Indi rect emissions that result from 
electricity consumed by the production process should also be monitored. 
In line with the above definition of systems boundaries , the following production steps 
may be regarded as being within the system boundaries of basic steel products:  
• Raw material preparation – including pre -heating, re -melting and alloying  
• Forming processes for basic steel products – all forming process steps, including 
casting, hot and cold rolling, shaping by forging, wire drawing 
• Finishing activities – all finishing steps including surface treatment (such as 
pickling, annealing, plating, coating, galvanizing) and further fabrication (cutting, 
welding, finishing)  
• Emissions control – for treating releases to air, water or ground.  
The following Figure 5-13 shows the system boundaries from crude steel to basic steel 
products.  
69 Figure 5-13: System boundaries of steel products production process 
Iron or s teel products  
 
  
 
Note that for final iron or steel products that contain more than 5% by mass of other 
materials, e.g. insulation materials in CN code 7309 00 30 (reservoirs, tanks, vats and 
similar containers for any material (other than compressed or liquefied gas), of iron or steel, o f a capacity exceeding 300 l, lined or heat -insulated), only the mass of iron or steel 
shall be reported  as the mass of the goods produced. 
Several  case studies showing how direct and indirect specific embedded emissions (SEE) 
values are derived for iron to steel products , using the mass balance method, and how the 
embedded emissions of imports into the EU are calculated, are given in section 7.2.2. 
  5.7 Aluminium sector 
The textbox below signposts the sector -specific sections in the Implementing Regulation, 
relevant for the CBAM transitional period.  
Implementing Regulation references:  
• Annex II , Section 2, Table 1 Mapping of CN codes to aggregated goods categories.  
• Annex II , Section 3 Production routes, system boundaries, and relevant precursors, as specified in 
sub-sections : 3.17 – Unwrought aluminium and 3.18 – Aluminium products.   
 
5.7.1 Unit of production and embedded emissions 
The quantity of declared aluminium goods imported into the EU should be expressed in 
metric tonnes.  As an operator, you should record the quantity of CBAM good(s) produced 
by the installation or production process, for the purposes of reporting. Production of 
basic steel 
products**CO2
Emissions
System boundaries:
embedded emissions
of basic steel products
(may apply to all steel routes)Basic steel 
productsCrude steel
(depending on 
production 
route)Fuels (incl. 
waste gases)
** This includes in a 
generic way all 
typical productions 
steps, such as 
casting, hot and 
cold rolling, coating 
etc.

70 Industrial sector Aluminium  
Production unit of goods  Tonnes (metric), reported separately for each 
type of sector goods, by installation or production process in the country of origin.  
Associated activities  Producing unwrought aluminium from alumina, or secondary raw materials (aluminium scrap), by metallurgical, chemical or electrolytic 
means; manufacture of semi -processed and 
finished aluminium products. 
Relevant greenhouse gases  Carbon dioxide ( CO 2) and perfluorocarbons 
(CF 4 and C 2F6) 
Direct Emissions  Tonnes (metric) of CO 2e  
Indirect Emissions  Quantity of electricity consumed (MWh), source and emissions factor used to calculate 
the indirect emissions in Tonnes (metric) of 
CO
2 or CO 2e.  
To be reported separately during transitional 
period. 
Unit for embedded emissions  Tonnes CO 2e emissions per tonne of goods, 
reported separately for each type of good, by installation in the country of origin. 
 
The aluminum sector should account for both direct emissions and indirect emissions in 
the transitional period. Indirect emissions are to b e reported separately48. Emissions should 
be reported in metric tonnes CO 2 equivalent (tCO 2e) emissions per tonne of output. This 
figure should be calculated for the specific installation or production process in your country of origin.  
Note that a case st udy showing how direct and indirect specific embedded emissions 
(SEE) values are derived for aluminium products , and how the embedded emissions of 
imports into the EU are calculated, is given in section 7.4.2. 
The following sections set out how the system boundaries of aluminium sector goods 
should be defined, and identify elements of the production process that should be included 
for the purposes of monitoring and reporting. 
 
5.7.2 Definition and explanation of sector goods covered 
The following Table 5-8 lists the relevant goods in scope for the CBAM transitional period 
in the aluminium industry sector. The aggregated goods category in the left hand column 
defines groups for which joint ‘production processes’ are to be defined for the purpose of 
monitoring.  
 
48   Note that for this sector indirect emissions are only reported during the transitional period (and not 
during the definitive period).  
71 Table 5 -8: CBAM goods in the aluminium sector  
Aggre gated 
goods 
category  Product CN Code  Description  
Unwrought 
aluminium  7601 Unwrought aluminium  
Aluminium products  7603 – 7608, 7609 00 00, 7610, 7611 00 00, 7612, 7613 00 00, 7614, 7616 7603 – Aluminium powders and flakes  
7604 – Aluminium bars, rods and profiles  
7605 – Aluminium wire  
7606 – Aluminium plates, sheets and strip, of a thickness exceeding 0,2 mm  
7607 – Aluminium foil (whether or not printed or backed with paper, paper -board, plastics or similar 
backing materials ) of a thickness (excluding any 
backing) not exceeding 0,2 mm  
7608 – Aluminium tubes and pipes  
7609 00 00 – Aluminium tube or pipe fittings (for example, couplings, elbows, sleeves)  
7610 – Aluminium structures (excluding prefabricated buildings of heading 9406) and parts of structures (for example, bridges and bridge -sections, towers, lattice 
masts, roofs, roofing frameworks, doors and windows and their frames and thresholds for doors, balustrades, pillars and columns); aluminium plates, rods, profiles, tubes and the like, prepared for use in structures  
7611 00 00 – Aluminium reservoirs, tanks, vats and similar containers, for any material (other than compressed or liquefied gas), of a capacity exceeding 
300 litres, whether or not lined or heat -insulated, but 
not fitted with mechanical or thermal equipment  
7612 – Aluminium casks, drums, cans, boxes and similar containers (including rigid or collapsible tubular containers), for any material (other than compressed or liquefied gas), of a capacity not exceeding 300 litres, whether or not lined or heat -
insulated, but not fitted with mechanical or thermal equipment  
7613 00 00 – Aluminium containers for compressed or liquefied gas  
7614 – Stranded wire, cables, plaited bands  and the 
like, of aluminium, not electrically insulated  
7616 – Other articles of aluminium  
Source: The CBAM Regulation, Annex I; Implementing Regulation, Annex II.  
72 The aggregated goods categories listed in Table 5-8 include  both finished aluminium 
products and a precursor ‘unwrought aluminium’ that is itself consumed in the production 
of aluminium goods. 
Only input materials listed as relevant precursors to the system boundaries of the 
production process as specified in the Implementing Regulation are to be considered. Table 
5-9 lists the possible precursors by aggregated goods category and production route below.  
Table 5-9: Aggregated goods categories, their production routes and possibly relevant precursors  
Aggregated Goods Category Relevant precursors   
Production route   
Unwrought aluminium  None for primary aluminium  
For secondary aluminium – unwrought aluminium from other sources, if used in the process
49  
Primary aluminium   
Secondary aluminium  
Aluminium products  Unwrought aluminium (differentiated between 
primary and secondary aluminium, if known), other 
aluminium products (if used in the production 
process).  
 
Unwrought aluminium is produced by several production route s (‘primary aluminium’ for  
electrolytic smelting , ‘secondary aluminium ’ for melting/recycling of scrap ) as metal 
ingots, blocks, billets, slabs or similar. It is defined as a ‘simple good’, as the raw materials 
(carbon anodes and alumina for primary aluminium, scrap for secondary aluminium) and fuels used in its manufacture are themselves considered to have zero embedded emissions.  
The aluminium goods  listed above include most types of aluminium product  
manufactured
50. Aluminium products  are defined as complex goods as they include the 
embedded emissions from the precursor unwrought aluminium.  
The production of aluminium sector goods is by a number of different proc ess routes, 
outlined below. 
 
5.7.3 Definition and explanation of relevant production processes and routes  
The system boundaries of the precursor unwrought aluminium and of  aluminium products 
are distinct and may , under certain conditions, be added together to include all processes 
directly or indirectly linked to the production processes for these goods, including input 
activities to , and output activities from the process  (see section 6.3).  
 
 
49   Note that if the product from secondary aluminium  production route  contains more than 5% alloying 
elements, the embedded emissions of the product shall be calculated as if the mass of alloying elements 
were unwrought aluminium from primary smelting.  
50  Excludes categories CN 7615 for  certain household articles and CN 7602 00 aluminium scrap.  
73 Figure 5-14: System boundaries and value chain of aluminium products 
System boundaries and value chain of  aluminium products  
 
  
 
The difference in primary aluminium smelting route in the above diagram is due to the 
different electrode materials used, i.e. pre -baked or Søderberg anodes. 
The relevant emissions that should be monitored for the aluminium sector are detailed in section 7.4.1.1. 
5.7.3.1 Unwrought aluminium – Primary (electrolytic) smelting  production route 
Primary aluminium is produced by the electrolysis of alumina
51 in electrolytic cells. 
During electrolysis, aluminium is  reduced and oxygen from the alumina is liberated and 
combines with the carbon anode to form carbon dioxide and carbon m onoxide – the carbon 
anodes in the primary aluminium process are therefore continuously consumed during the 
process.  
Primary aluminium c ell systems vary according to the type of anode used. The ‘Pre-baked’ 
electrolytic cell use s multiple pre -baked carbon anodes that must be regularly replaced. 
The ‘Søderberg’ electrolytic cell uses a single continuous carbon anode, which is self -
baked  in situ within the cell by means of the heat released during the electrolytic process 
within the smelter; ‘green’ anode paste briquettes are added at the top while the anode is 
consumed at the bottom. Molten aluminium is deposited at the cathode and collects a t the 
bottom of the cell, where it is periodically withdrawn by vacuum siphons into crucibles before being transported to the casting plant. At the casting plant molten aluminium is held in holding furnaces for further processing prior to casting metal ingots, blocks, billets, slabs or similar; small quantities of clean commercial scrap may also be added at this stage.  
 
51  Alumina is purified aluminium oxide produced by beneficiation of bauxite ore via the Bayer process. 
Production of alumina usually takes place at a different site to primary aluminium production for 
logistical and power supply reasons  Primary Al (with 
pre-baked Anodes)Primary Al 
(Søderberg )Secondary Al 
(using scrap)
*Forming includes all types 
of downstream processing: 
Alloying (if not done already 
at stage of unformed 
Aluminium (ingots), casting, 
extrusion, rolling, etc.Alumina
Other materials 
and fuelsPre-baked Anodes
Basic aluminium 
productsUnformed 
AluminiumPrimary 
smelting
Forming*Alumina
Other materials 
and fuelsAnode paste
Basic aluminium 
productsUnformed 
AluminiumPrimary 
smelting
Forming*Aluminium Scrap
Secondary 
melting
Basic aluminium 
productsUnformed 
Aluminium
Forming*

74 The Implementing Regulation (section 3 Annex II) defines the system boundaries for direct 
emissions monitoring for the primary (electrolytic ) smelting production route, as 
encompassing:   
“ – CO 2 emissions from the consumption of electrodes or electrode pastes .  
– CO 2 emissions from any fuels used (e.g. for drying and pre -heating of raw 
materials, heating of electrolysis cells, heating required for casting) . 
– CO 2 emissions from any flue gas treatment, from soda ash or limestone if 
relevant.  
– Perfluorocarbon emissions caused by anode effects  monitored in accordance 
with Section B.7 of Annex III.”  
There are no relevant precursors for this production process. Indirect emissions that result from electricity consumed by the production process should also be monitored.  
In line with the above definition of systems boundaries , the following production steps 
may be regarded as being within the system boundaries of primary aluminium installations:  
• Raw material preparation – including storage of various additive constituents . 
• Electrolytic cell system for aluminium production process – all steps . 
• Casting plant – all steps including holding furnaces, conveying systems, further 
metal processing (metal treatment, alloying and homogenisation) and casting. 
• Emissions control – for treating releases to air, water or ground  
• The process materials consumed by the primary aluminium production route –  
alumina, pre -baked carbon anodes, ‘green’ anode paste briquettes, cryolite and 
other additives – are treated as raw materials and so have zero embedded emissions.  
• Details on the sp ecial rules for the aluminium sector for determining emissions 
from PFCs are given in section 6.5.5 and section 7.4.1.2 of this guidance document , and a case study  showing how the specific embedded emissions for 
aluminium sector goods are derived is given in section 7.4.2. 
 
75 Figure 5-15: System boundaries of the unwrought aluminium – primary smelting 
production route 
Unwrought aluminium  – Primary smelting  
 
  
 
5.7.3.2 Unwrought aluminium – Secondary melting (recycling) production route 
Secondary aluminium is produced mainly from post -consumer aluminium scrap collected 
for recycling  (although unwrought aluminium may also be separately added) . Scrap is 
sorted according to type (cast or wrought alloy) and the sort of  pre-treatment measures 
required  (e.g. de -coating, de -oiling) , and is then re -melted in the appropriate type of 
furnace (typically rotary or reverberatory, but induction furnaces may also be used) before 
further processing including: alloying, melt treatment (addition of salt or chlorination) and finally casting metal ingots, blocks, billets, slabs or similar. Typical fuels used are natural gas, LPG or fuel oil.  
The Implementing Regulation (section 3 Annex II) defines the system boundaries for direct 
emissions monitoring for the secondary melting (recycling) production route, as encompassing:   
“ – CO
2 emissions from any fuels used for drying and pre -heating of raw materials, 
used in melting furnaces, in pre -treatment of scrap such as de -coating and de -
oiling, and combustion of the related residues, and fuels required  for casting of 
ingots, billets or slabs. 
– CO 2 emissions from any fuels used in associated activities such as treatment of 
skimmings and slag recovery.  – CO
2 emissions from any flue gas treatment, from soda ash or limestone if 
relevant .” 
A relevant precu rsor is unwrought aluminium from other sources, if used in the process. 
Indirect emissions that result from electricity consumed by the production process should 
also be monitored. Primary 
smeltingCO2+ PFC
Emissions
System boundaries:
embedded emissions
of aluminium
(primary smelting)Unformed 
aluminiumOptional: 
FuelsAluminaPre-baked 
anodesAnode paste
(Søderberg route)
Electricity*
*Electricity is mentioned here 
explicitly as it is the main 
energy input to the process.

76 In line with the above definition of systems boundaries, the following production steps 
should be regarded as being within the system boundaries of secondary aluminium: 
• Raw material preparation – including sorting, pre-treatment (de-coating, de -oiling), 
drying and pre-heating of scrap . 
• Furnace system for aluminium production process – all steps, including furnace 
charging, melting and holding furnaces. 
• Casting plant – all steps including holding furnaces, conveying systems, further 
metal processing (metal treatment, alloying and homogenisation) and casting. 
• Emissions control – for treating releases to air, water or ground. 
The following Figure 5-16 shows the system boundaries of the relevant processes for 
secondary aluminium production. 
Figure 5-16: System boundaries of the Unwrought alumi nium – secondary melting 
production route 
Unwrought aluminium  – Secondary melting  
 
  
 There are no PFC emissions from the secondary aluminium process. Aluminium scrap is the  main material input to the secondary melting production route . 
Scrap (whether pre- consumer or post -consumer) is treated as a raw material and so has 
zero embedded emissions.  Note that where the product of this process contains more than 5% alloying elements, the 
embedded em issions of the product shall be calculated as if the mass of alloying elements 
were unwrought aluminium from primary smelting.  System boundaries:
embedded emissions
of aluminium
(secondary smelting)Secondary 
production
(Re-melting)CO2
Emissions
Unformed 
aluminiumAluminium scrap Fuels

77 5.7.3.3 Aluminium products  production process  
Aluminium products are produced by the further processing of precursor unwrought 
aluminium (alloyed or un- alloyed). Aluminium products are produced by a variety of 
forming processes including extrusion, casting, hot and cold rolling, forging and drawing. 
Extrusion is a common process used to produce aluminium profiles. Hot and cold rolling may be used to produce plate, sheet and foil. Casting may be used to produce complex forms.  
The Implementing Regulation (section 3 Annex II) defines the system boundaries for direct emissions monitoring for the aluminium products production route, as encompassing:   
“ – All CO
2 emissions from fuel consumption in processes forming aluminium 
products, and flue gas cleaning.”  
Relevant precursors are unwrought al uminium, if used in the production process (primary 
and secondary aluminium should be treated separately, if data is known, as each has different embedded emissions), and aluminium products, if used in the production process. 
Indirect emissions that result from electricity consumed by the production process should 
also be monitored.  
In line with the above definition of systems boundaries , the following production steps 
should be regarded as being within the system boundaries of basic aluminium products 
installations:  
• Raw material preparation – including pre -heating, re -melting and alloying.  
• Forming processes – all forming process steps for basic aluminium products, 
including (but not limited to): extrusion, casting, hot and cold rolling, forging, 
drawing.  
• Finishing activities – including sizing, annealing, surface preparation and treatment 
and further fabrication.  
• Emissions control – for treating releases to air, water or ground.  
The following Figure 5-17 shows the system boundaries of the relevant processes for 
aluminium products. 
 
78 Figure 5-17: System boundaries of Aluminium products production process 
Aluminium products  production process  
 
  
 
There are no PFC emissions resulting from aluminium products forming processes. Note that where the product of this process contains more than 5% alloying elements, the 
embedded emissions of the product should be calculated as if the mass of alloying elements 
were unwrought aluminium from primary smelting. Also note that for products that contain more than 5 % by mass of other materials, e.g. 
insulation materials in CN code 7611 00 00 only the mass of alumini um shall be reported 
as the mass of the goods produced. A case study  showing how the specific embedded emissions for aluminium sec tor goods 
are derived is given in section 7.4.2. Forming steps*CO2
Emissions
System boundaries:
embedded emissions
of basic aluminium productsBasic aluminium 
productsUnformed 
aluminiumFuels
* Forming includes all types 
of downstream processing: 
Alloying (if not done already 
at stage of unformed 
Aluminium (ingots), casting, 
extrusion, rolling, etc .

79 6 MONITORING AND REPORTING  OBLIGATIONS   
This section contains all of the  rules necessary for monitoring and calculating embedded 
emissions during the transitional period. It is structured as follows:  
• Section 6.1 contains d efinitions  and principles . 
• Section 6.2 e xplains the concept of embedded emissions  (6.2.1) , before it 
provides the calculation rules  (6.2.2) in three steps:  
o Installation -level  monitoring ( 6.2.2.1) . 
o Attributing the emissions data to production processes  within the 
installation ( 6.2.2.2) . 
o Calculation of specific embedded emissions  from the attributed 
emissions of the processes, the embedded emissions of the precursor, and 
the activity level of the production process.  
• How to d efine the production processes  of the installation and their  system 
boundaries  is the topic of section 6.3.  
• Section 6.4 deals with the p lanning of the monitoring methodology. This includes 
setting up the MMD ( monitoring methodology documentation ), how to select 
the best available data sources  and the possibilities to limit monitoring costs . 
The section also provides  advice on setting up a control system  for ensuring 
correct data.  
• Section 6.5 is a central part of this guidance. It gives guidance on the eligible 
monitor ing approaches  to monitor direct emissions at installation level, with the 
following sub- structure, reflecting the “building- block” character of allowed 
approaches:  
o Section 6.5.1: Calculation -based methodology  
 Calculation formulae and parameters are explained in 6.5.1.1 
(standard method)  and 6.5.1.2 ( mass balance) . 
 Rules for determining activity data  (i.e. quantities of fuels and 
materials used) are given in section 6.5.1.3. 
 The rules for determining ‘ calculation factors ’ (i.e. information 
on properties and composition of the fuels and materials used) are subject of 6.5.1.4. These methods include the selection of appropriate standard values, are the use of laboratory analyses , 
for which basic requirements are discussed.  
o In section 6.5.2, the measurement -based methodology is described, i.e. 
how to use CEMS ( continuous emissions monitoring systems). This is 
in particular necessary for N
2O emissions . 
o The conditions to use other methods, in particular from other carbon pricing schemes , are explained in section 6.5.3. 
o Requirements for accounting biomass  emissions as zero in all the above 
methods are outlined in section 6.5.4, which is suppl emented by 
additional information in Annex E . 
o The monitoring of PFCs  (perfluorocarbon emissions) is explained in 
section 6.5.5. 
80 o As the last element of installation -level monitoring, section 6.5.6 outlines 
basic elements of ‘t ransferred CO 2’ monitoring, which is the link to future 
CCS and CCU rules .  
• Indirect emissions  of an installation  and their monitoring requirements are 
explained in section 6.6.  
• The rules for attributing emissions to production processes  are the subject of 
section 6.7 containing the following detailed rules:  
o General rules for monitoring: 6.7.1, 
o Flows of (measurable) h eat and the related emissions: 6.7.2,  
o Electricity  and respective emissions: 6.7.3, 
o Rules for the combined production of heat and electricity ( cogeneration, 
CHP ) to supplement the two previous sections are explained in section 
6.7.4. 
o Waste gases  and their emission attribution rules: 6.7.5, 
• Calculation of embedded emissions  from attributed emissions : Relevant 
guidance is found in section 6.8 with the following sub- sections:  
o Rules on goods produced  (quality and activity levels ) are found in 6.8.1.  
o The rules for monitoring quality and quantity of precursor materials  are 
discussed in section 6.8.2. 
• The monitoring rules are concluded by explaining what can be done if the 
monitoring fails, i.e. data gaps occur, or if some information could not be obtained within the required time frame (section 6.9):  
o Use of default values  of specific embedded emissions provided by the 
European Commission is discussed in section 6.9.1. 
o For indirect emissions, i.e. default values for the emission factor of electricity , is described in section 6.9.2. 
o Guidance on closing of minor data gaps  in everyday monitoring 
activities is given in section 6.9.3. 
• Collecting data on a carbon price due in the country of origin (as possible rebate from the CBAM obligation) is the topic of section 6.10. 
• Finally, section 6.11 explains the r eporting template, i.e. the template which the 
European Commission provides for the communication bet ween operators of 
installations producing CBAM goods  and the EU importers in order to provide 
the data the latter require for producing the ‘quarterly CBAM reports’, i.e. for complying with the CBAM Regulation. That template is also proposed for communicat ion between operators producing complex goods and their suppliers 
of precursor materials.  
 
  
81 6.1 Definitions and scope of emissions covered in the CBAM  
In order to  complete the relevant calculations, it is important to understand the precise 
meanings of terms are u sed in these calculations. In addition to the  general definitions 
introduced in S ection  4.2, this section presents additional terms used in the following 
sections of this guide.  
6.1.1 Installation, production process and production routes  
The following hierarchical approach of definitions applies:  
• ‘Installation’ means a stationary technical unit where a production process is 
carried out.  
• ‘Production process’  means the parts of an installation in which chemical or 
physical processes are carried out to produce goods under an aggregated goods 
category defined in Table 1 of S ection 2 of Annex II to the Implementing 
Regulation, and its specified system boundaries regarding inputs, outputs and corresponding emissions. 
• ‘Aggregated goods category’ is implicitly  defined in the Implementing Regulation 
by listing the relevant aggregated goods categories and all the goods identified by their CN codes in Table 1 of Section 2 of Annex II.  
• ‘Production route’  means a specific technology used in a production process to 
produce goods under an aggregated goods category. 
From these definitions it can be deduced that an installation may consist of one or more 
production processes. For the purpose of the CBAM only those production processes are relevant that are listed in Annex II Section 2 of the Implementing Regulation. If  your 
installation carries out other  production processes, it is your choice to include them in your 
monitoring methodology or not. In both cases the rules for attributing the emissions to the CBAM -relevant processes will work.  
One production process usual ly relates to one group of CBAM goods produced (the 
‘aggregated goods categories’) . However, in some case more than one production route 
exists for producing these goods. If more production routes co- exist at your installation for 
the same aggregated goods  category, they may be jointly monitored using one production 
process and its respective system boundaries.  
From the above, the short summary is: An installation can consist of more than one 
production process, and production processes can consist of more than one production 
route. The “attributed emissions” are always calculated at the production process level. 
Note that some further rules  exist for defining production processes and their system 
boundaries, as discussed in S ection  6.3. 
 
6.1.2 Activity level, quantity of goods produced 
In a given reporting period, ‘activity level’  is the total quantity of goods produced within 
a production process meeting a particular CN product specification for that good, 
expressed in tonnes or MWh for electricity. For the purpose of determining the activity 
level of a production process, the quantity of all goods under all CN codes which represent 
an ‘aggregated goods category’ are added up.  
82 The activity level for an installation or production process should take into account  
saleable product52, including any product used directly as precursor in another 
production process  for producing other products (termed ‘rel evant precursor material’).  
In order to avoid any double counting  of production, you should  only consider the final 
products leaving the system boundaries of the production process . Product that is returned 
to the same process (where the production of prec ursors is included in the same production 
process)  as well as any waste or scrap  is excluded from the total. 
In reporting the activity level for goods, you  should also take into account  any special 
provisions given in Annex II, Section 3  of the Implementing Regulation  for specific 
production processes or production routes. These are also referred to for each sector as 
relevant in section  7. 
 
6.1.3 Direct and indirect embedded emissions  
During the transitional period you need to account for both ‘direct emissions’53 and 
‘indirect emissions’54, in reporting the embedded emissions of the goods produced at your  
installations. In this context: 
• Direct emissions  include combustion and process emissions for your  installation , 
but also emissions produced during the production of heat consumed in your 
installation, in case the installation receives heat from adjacent installations or 
from a district heating network .  
• Direct attributed emissions are the emissions attributed to the relevant production process producing goods at your  installation, based on your  
installation’s direct emissions, emissions from relevant heat flows, material flows, waste gases (if relevant).   
• Direct embedded emissions  of the goods produced are calculated from the direct 
attributed emissions of the production process by adding the e mbedded emissions 
of any relevant precursor materials used in this production process.  
• Specific direct embedded emissions : These are the direct embedded emissions 
of the goods produced, divided by the activity level of the production process. The result is  expressed as tonne CO
2e per tonne of product. 
• Indirect emissions  include emissions related to the electricity consumed  at your 
installation.  Note that if your installation produces itself electricity, the fuels 
consumed in the electricity production count  as direct  emissions of the 
installation. But electricity production is considered a separate production process, i.e. those direct emissions are not attributed to direct attributed emissions of any goods produced in this installation.  
 
52  I.e. products  that meet the product specification for an aggregated CN goods category listed in the 
Implementing Regulation.  
53  ‘Direct emissions’ mean emissions from the production processes of goods including e missions from 
the production of heating and cooling consumed during the production processes, regardless of the 
location of the production of the heating and cooling;  
54  ‘Indirect emissions’ mean emissions from the production of electricity, which is consumed during the 
production processes of goods, regardless of the location of the production of the consumed electricity.  
83 • Indirect attributed emissions are the indirect  emissions attributed to the relevant 
production process producing goods at your  installation . 
• Indirect embedded emissions  of the goods produced are calculated from the 
indirect attributed emissions of the production process by adding the  indirect 
embedded emissions from any relevant precursors  used in the production process .  
• Specific indirect embedded emissions : These are the indirect embedded 
emissions of the goods produced, divided by the activity level of the production 
process. The result is expressed as tonne CO 2e per tonne of product.  
• (Specific) total embedded emissions : The sum of (specific) direct and indirect 
embedded emissions.  
Your approach used to monitor direct and indirect emissions should reflect the range of 
‘emission sources ’ and ‘ source streams ’ (for definition see section 6.2.2.1) that need to be 
covered for your individual installation and its production route s. 
Embedded emissions in precursor goods  
You should include the embedded emissions in precursor goods (both direct and indirect 
emissions, as above) if relevant in the calculation of total embedded emissions for a final 
good, making it a ‘complex good’ . The embedded emissions of the relevant precursor 
goods55 are added to attributed emissions of the complex good. 
The inclusion of e mbedded emissions of precursor goods is necessary to ensure 
comparability of carbon costs under the EU ETS and the CBAM. The relevant greenhouse s 
gas emissions correspond to those greenhouse gas56 emissions covered also by A nnex I to 
the EU ETS Directive57, namely carbon dioxide (CO 2) for all sectors, and additionally 
nitrous oxide (N 2O) for fertili zers and perfluorocarbons (PFCs) for aluminium. 
Embedded emissions outside of the operator’s control  
Where you ( as an operator ) are receiving electricity, heat or precursor goods from outside  
of the installation , for use in your installation’s production process es, you should use the 
most recent data available from their supplier for the purpose  of determining the embedded 
emissions  of your CBAM goods . Such emissions -related data include:  
• Indirect emissions from imported grid electricity; 
• Emissions from electricity and heat imported from other installations; 
• Direct and indirect emissions of precursors received from other installations.  
 
 
55  Where a precursor is itself a complex good, this process is repeated recursively until no more precursors 
are relevant.  
56  ‘Greenhous e gases’ mean greenhouse gases as specified in Annex I to the CBAM Regulation in relation 
to each of the goods listed in that Annex;  
57 Directive 2003/87/EC  
84 6.1.4 Units for reporting embedded emissions  
The unit used for reporting embedded greenhouse gas is ‘tonne of CO 2e58’, which means 
one metric tonne of carbon dioxide (‘CO 2’), or an amount of any other greenhouse gas  
listed in Annex I to the CBAM Regulation with an equivalent (‘e’) global warming 
potential59; i.e. where relevant, N 2O and PFCs emissions should be converted to their 
‘tCO 2e’ value.  
For reporting purposes embedded emissions data should be rounded to whole tonnes CO 2e 
over the reporting period. Parameters used to calculate the reported embedded emissions 
should be rounded to include all significant digits, to a maximum of 5 decimal places. The 
level of rounding required for parameters used in such calculations will depend on the accuracy and precision of the measurement equipment used.  
 
6.2 How to determine embedded emissions  
6.2.1 The concept  
The concept of embedded emissions, for the purposes of the CBAM, is based on, but not 
fully aligned with the principles and requirements for a carbon footprint of products (CFP). 
A CFP is usually understood as an amount of GHG emissions (expressed as kg or  t CO
2e) 
per declared unit , (e.g. a tonne of good) based on a life cycle perspective covering, all 
significant emissions from upstream and downstream processes (called life cycle stages), from mining and production to transport, use and end- of-life. 
The difference from the CFP scope is be cause the CBAM is intended to cover the same 
emissions as would be covered by the EU ETS if the produc tion were situated in the EU. 
The system boundaries of emissions covered by the EU ETS, and therefore the CBAM, 
are narrower than those in a CFP . Downstre am emissions (emissions from the use and 
end-of-life) of the products are outside the scope of the EU ETS and the CBAM. Emissions 
included from transport of materials between sites and from processes further upstream are 
not included either. Figure 6- 1 summarizes this situation graphically.  
For the purpose of determining CBAM embedded emissions at a product level, the starting 
point are emissions of an installation. Th e installation’s emissions are split (‘attributed’) to 
emissions of its production processes. Then any relevant embedded emissions of precursor 
materials are added, and the result is divided by the activity level of each production 
process, thereby resulti ng in ‘specific embedded emissions’ of the goods resulting from 
the production process. These considerations are reflected in the definitions of direct and 
indirect emissions, as set out in the CBAM Regulation, and in its Annex IV which lays 
down the basic  calculation approach, which in particular requires taking into account 
precursor materials. The details of this approach are elaborated in the Implementing Regulation, in particular Annexes II and III, and explained in this document. 
 
 
58  ‘tonne of CO2e’ means one metric tonne of carbon dioxide (‘CO2’), or an amount of any other 
green house gas listed in Annex I to the CBAM Regulation with an equivalent global warming potential  
59  In line with the EU ETS legislation, the 100 -year GWP values of  the 5th IPCC Assessment Report (AR5) 
are used.  
85 Figure 6-1: Comparison of product environmental footprint, product carbon footprint, and 
the specific partial carbon footprint that is to be used for determining embedded emissions 
in the CBAM.  
Comparison of scopes in product footprints and the requirements of the CB AM 
 
  
 
6.2.2 From installation’s emissions to goods’ embedded emissions  
This section outlines the steps to follow to determine the embedded emissions of a good; 
first explaining the concept, then the attribution of emissions and finally the calculation of the embedded emissions.  
The textbox below signposts the key sections in the Implementing Regulation for this 
purpose, relevant for the CBAM transitional period. 
Implementing Regulation references:  
Annex II , Section 3 Production routes, system boundaries, and relevant precursors  
Annex III , Section A Definitions  and principles, in particular, sub -sections A.4. Division of installations into 
production processes  
 
To aid understanding of the monitoring rules contained in Annex III to  the Implementing 
Regulation, this section explain s some terms and concepts. If you are experienced with 
emissions monitoring , you may skip this section. This might be the case for example if 
your installation is located in a jurisdiction where a carbon pricing system (e.g. an 
emissions trading system) or a mandatory monitoring rule for  GHGs applies, or if your Upstream 
processes
•Mining
•Transport
•Etc.Production of 
precursors
•If applicable (only 
for complex 
goods)Production 
process
•Point of MRV
•Producer outside 
the EUUse stage
•Including 
distributionEnd of life
•Re-use
•recycling
•Waste disposal
Full Product 
Environmental 
Footprint (PEF)Product Carbon 
Footprint (PCF)Other 
emissions 
(water, air)
GHG 
emissions
Waste
Energy 
consumption
Toxicity and 
other dangers
Cradle to gate
Cradle to graveGHG 
Emissions
Products 
under 
considerationRaw materials
GHG 
Emissions
Precursors
Other productsSystem 
boundaries 
for CBAM 
embedded 
Emissions
other impacts beyond 
Climate change/GHG 
emissions

86 installation performs GHG reduction projects under an internationally accepted 
certification scheme with verification.  
The approach of the CBAM is “top- down” as follows:  
• First the emissions of the installation are determined (details in section 6.5).  
• Then the installation is split into ‘production processes’ which produce the 
(groups of) goods for which the embedded emissions should be determined. The total installation’s emissions are  ‘attributed’ to these production processes using 
the concepts described in section 6.2.2.2. The rules for defining boundaries of production proces ses are found in section 6.3.  
• The attribution of emissions to production processes is a relatively complex task, because the rules had to be design ed in a way that different installation designs 
are treated as equally as possible. Such different situations involve e.g.:  
o The different ways of heat supply: Heat can be produced directly within 
the process from fuels or electricity, it can be received fr om other parts of 
the installation (e.g. from a central boiler, a CHP unit, a steam grid with various heat sources, from exothermal chemical reactions) or from outside the installation (from a known boiler house or CHP unit, or from a district heating netw ork). A certain amount of emissions should be attributed to 
any such heat. Therefore , attribution of emissions to production processes 
requires the monitoring of relevant heat streams (for rules see section 6.7.2).  
o Differences in electricity supply: It requires the monitoring of electricity 
quantities (rules see section 6.7.3)  exported from production processes 
(the import is relevant for the determination of indirect emissions).  For 
every type of electricity there are common elements (such as the emission 
factor).  
o Finally, so- called ‘waste gases’  have to be taken into account , i.e. gases 
that have some heating value due to incompletely oxidised fuels and which occur as result of some production processes (e.g. the blast furnace of a steel plant) are treated with some special rules whi ch evolved during 
the development of EU ETS benchmarks (see section 6.7.5).  
• The next step is the addition of embedded emissions of the relevant pr ecursor 
materials.  The ‘attributed emissions’ of the production process only give the 
emissions of the CBAM good as if it were a ‘simple good’. However, if precursors are identified as relevant in Annex II, section 3 of the Implementing Regulation, i.e. if  the good is a ‘complex good’, the precursor’s own embedded 
emissions need to be added. Only thereafter it is correct to use the term ‘embedded emissions’ of the goods produced.   
The concept is further described in section 6.2.2.3 , and rules for monitoring of 
precursor -related data are given in section  6.8.2. 
• Finally, the embedded emissions as determined under the previous step still relate to the total production process and the total quantity of goods produced therein, over the whole ‘reporting period’, usually a (calendar) year. However, the importers need t o report the embedded direct and indirect emissions per tonne of 
product , which are the so -called ‘specific (direct or indirect) embedded 
emissions’. Those specific embedded emissions are determined by dividing the process -level embedded emissions by the ‘ activity level’, i.e. the total quantity (in 
87 tonnes) of the goods produced. Rules for determining the activity level are 
discussed in section 6.1.2. 
 
Note: The Commission’s template for the communication between operators and 
importers is designed to perform most of the relevant calculations automatically when 
the necessary data is input. It is , therefore , a valuable tool for you as an operator to provide 
all the data that importers are obliged to report, as  it will help you to avoid incomplete data 
and to reduce calculation errors to a large extent. Therefore,  it is highly recommended to 
use this template. It is described in section 6.11  
 
6.2.2.1 Concepts of installation-level GHG monitoring 
Like other carbon pricing schemes, Annex III, section B, of the Implementing Regulation 
for the CBAM provides several monitoring methodologies like a building block system, so that operators can choose for their installation the best possible monitoring approach, where “best” includes elements such as accuracy, but also cost efficiency. For the latter purpose, it is often beneficial to choose monitoring methods which are already available at the installation, e.g. measuring instruments that are used for process control, or for confirming quantities of materials and fuels received or sold.  
Here we use Figure 6-2 to introduce some of the main concepts and terms which are then 
used when discussing the Implementing Regulation’s detailed monitoring rules in section 
6.5 of this document. 
 Figure 6-2: Example of a simple installation for explaining basic monitoring concepts  
(please see main text for more information).  
Example of an installation with basic monitoring concepts  for direct emissions  
 
  Installation boundaries
Source streams
Source streams 
(Output from 
mass balance)Emission source 1 
Boiler
Emission source 2 
Rotary kilnDryer
(no emissions)Natural gas
Fuel oil
Coal
SlagRaw material 1
Raw material 2Steam CondensateProductEmissions
Emission 
point:
Stack Measurement 
point: CEMS
… Measurement instruments

88 The fictitious example installation consists of a dryer in which raw material  1 is dried using 
steam from a boiler. This material is considered not to contribute to the emissions. Another 
raw material (e.g. limestone ) is calcined in a rotary kiln, where CO 2 is set free from a 
carbonate. A mixture of the calcined materials is considered the only product of this installation, which consequently has only one production process. The following elements can be shown using Figure 6- 2. 
Definitions : 
• ‘Source stream ’
60: The fuel s or material s containing carbon that can be released 
by combustion or other chemical processes are summarised by the term  ‘source 
stream’. In case that outputs such as products, by- products or wastes contain 
significant amounts of carbon, they would also qualify as ‘s ource streams’, and 
the ‘mass balance’ approach would take these into account by subtracting their carbon amounts from the emissions. In the  Figure 6-2, input source s treams are 
the fuels natural gas, fuels oil and coal, furthermore the material  “raw material 2”, 
and potentially the products and the slag, if they contain relevant amounts of carbon.  
• ‘Emission source ’
61: Single process units, such as the boiler and the kiln are 
termed ‘emission sources’. Note that also the stack could be considered an 
emission source. It is, however, more consistent to term that an ‘ emission point ’, 
which is a place where a Continuous Emissions Measurement System (CEMS) can be installed at a ‘measurement point’ (which is the location of the CEMS). 
Monitoring approaches:  
Annex III to the CBAM Implementing Regulation allows the following monitoring 
approaches at installation level:  
• Calculation -based approach  in two variants  (more details are given in section  
6.5.1.1) : 
o Standard method: This requires the quantity (‘ activity data’) of all the 
fuels and input materials  to be determined , as well as some qualitative 
information on these fuels and materials , in particular the ‘ emission 
factor ’. Should some carbon not be emitted (e.g. if some carbon remains 
in the ash of coal), then  this is taken into account by the ‘ oxidation 
factor ’. Other incomplete processes are taken into account by a 
‘conversion factor’. In the example of  Figure 6- 2 the measurement 
instruments indicate where quantities of the source streams are determined 
for this purpose.  
o Mass balance : In this case, the carbon quantities of all fuels, input 
materials as  well as output materials are determined, again by determining 
their quantities as well as their carbon content . 
 
60  Definition in the Implementing Regulation: ‘source stream’ means any of the following:   
(a) a specific fuel type, raw material or product giving rise to emissions of relevant greenhouse gases 
at one or more emission sources as a result of its consumption or production;   
(b) a specific fuel type, raw material or product containing carbon and included in the calculation of 
greenhouse gas emissions using a mass balance method;  
61  Definition in the Implementing Regulation: ‘emission source’ means a separately  identifiable part of an 
installation or a process within an installation, from which relevant greenhouse gases are emitted.  
89 o What is not shown in  Figure 6- 2: If a source stream contains biomass, the 
respective CO 2 emissions may be zero -rated under certain conditions. This 
is achieved by multiplying the ‘ preliminary emission factor’ by a term 
“1 – biomass fraction ”, so that in case of pure fossil fuel, the resulting 
emission factor is identical to the preliminary emission factor, while it is 
zero for pure biomass. However, only biomass complying with certain sustainability criteria  is eligible for such “zero -rating. 
• Measurement -based  approach  (more details are given in section  6.5.2) : Instead 
of monitoring separately all the source streams, it may sometimes be desirable to 
perform monitoring by a single operation. In Figure 6- 2Figure 6- 2:  the stack 
receives all emissions from all emission sources (and consequently from all 
sourc e streams. If a CEMS  is installed here, it can be used to monitor the whole 
installation’s emissions.  
• Note that for avoiding double counting, there is a choice to be made between 
calculation -based and measurement -based approach. Both can co- exist at an 
installation for different parts of the installation, or for mutual corroboration of 
the same emissions data. However, you, as the operator, have to make a choice 
which of the methods to use in a way that neither gaps nor double counting in your monitoring occur. For making this choice, section 6.4.4 gives further advice.  
• Other approaches : The Implementing Regulation acknowledges that some 
operators need time to adapt to the new requirements. Therefore, under some conditions, other monitoring approaches are allowed. Section 6.5.3 provides further information. 
Measurement instruments  and analyses : 
Figure 6-2 indicates symbolic measurement instruments. Some further clarification is 
justified: 
• Measurements for determining quantities of fuels and materials can be carried out basically in two ways: Continual  metering (such as using a gas meter or a liquid 
flow meter for oil), which requires only reading of the incremental amounts consumed, e.g. monthly. On the other hand, batch -wise metering is applied e.g. 
where every truck load, or train or ship loads are weighted separately. Such quantities are usually stored at the installation before use. Therefore, stocks  need 
to be taken into account at the beginning and end of the reporting period.   
In the figure, it can be assumed that natural gas is metered continually, while fuel oil, coal and the raw materials are metered batch -wise.  
• For selecting a monitoring approach, it is relevant whether an instrument or sampling point is under the operator’s control  or under somebody else’s 
control . In the example of  Figure 6- 2, the  meter for natural gas is indicated to be 
outside the installation boundaries. This happens often, that the metering is done by the fuel supplier . Ther efore, official information such as invoices  may be 
used for determining the quantity of fuels and materials (more details are given in section  6.5).  
• Regarding the qualitative information on source streams (the ‘ calculation 
factors ’), in principle two options exist  (more details are given in section  
6.5.1.4) : 
o Fixed values are used for the emission factor etc.: These can be (internationally accepted) standard values  from the IPCC guidelines as 
90 presented in Annex V to the Implementing Regulation (and copied in 
Annex E  of this guidance) , or more suitable national values, literature 
values etc.  
o Values determined by laboratory analyses : This approach is appropriate 
for larger a mounts of fuels and materials, or where the quality of the fuel 
or material is strongly variable. The CBAM Implementing Regulation 
provides rules on sampling and analyses. In particular, sampling must be carried out in a representative way (the sampling po int might correlate 
with the measuring points for quantity, but this is not always appropriate), and analyses are to be carried out according to accepted standards in laboratories that are competent for the task (ideally demonstrated by accreditation accor ding to ISO/IEC 17025).  
Further cases not shown in this picture  on which the Implementing Regulation contains 
rules : 
• Special methods for the determination of non- CO
2 greenhouse gases: PFC 
(perfluorocarbons) in the production of Aluminium  (section 6.5.5) , and N 2O in 
the production of nitric acid and fertilizers (section 7.3.1).  
• Rules on ‘transferred CO 2’ relating to CCU and CCS62 (more details are given in 
section  6.5.6.2).  
 
Figure 6-3: Schematic description of system boundaries relevant for the attribution of 
emissions to a production process (please see main text for more information).  
Principle of production process accounting  
 
Source: Umweltbundesamt/European Commission63   
 
 
62  Carbon Capture and Utilisation, and Carbon Capture and (geological) S torage  
63  Guidance document No. 5 on monitoring for free al location  in the EU ETS :   
https://climate.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2019 -02/p4_gd5_mr_guidance_en.pdf   

91 6.2.2.2 Attribution of emissions to production processes  
As has been said above in section 6.2.2, the attribution of emissions is a complex task . This 
is because a production process’s system boundaries in principle form an energy and mass 
balance, from which the result are the attributed emissions, as sketched in  Figure 6- 3. 
 
Attributed direct emissions  
For calculating attributed direct emissions of a production process, the relevant formula is 
given in section F.1 of Annex III to the Implementing Regulation. It  is applied using total 
figures over the whole reporting period for the parameters given in the equation as follows:  
 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷=𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚∗+𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝐻𝐻,𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖−𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝐻𝐻,𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑖𝑖+𝑊𝑊𝐺𝐺𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷,𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖−𝑊𝑊𝐺𝐺𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷,𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑖𝑖− 𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒,𝑖𝑖𝐷𝐷𝑐𝑐𝑝𝑝  
Where 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷 is calculated to have a negative value, it shall be set to zero.  
This formula provides a guideline which parameters need to be monitored whenever an installation consists of more than one production process, or where heat supply is separated, or where waste gases or electricity production are found in an installation. N ote 
that details will be given in sections 6.7.2 (heat), 6.7.3 (electricity) and 6.7.5 (waste gases).  
Parameter explanations are as follows : 
𝑨𝑨𝑨𝑨𝑨𝑨𝑨𝑨𝑨𝑨𝒎𝒎𝑫𝑫𝑫𝑫𝑨𝑨  are the attributed direct emission of the production process over the 
whole reporting period, expressed in t CO 2e; 
𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚∗  are the directly attributable emissions from the production process, 
determined for the reporting period using the rules provided in Se ction 
B of Annex III to the Implementing Regulation , and the following rules:  
Measurable heat: Where fuels are consumed for the production of 
measurable heat which is consumed outside the production process under consideration, or which is used in more than one production process (which includes situations with imports from and exports to other installations), the fuels’ emissions are not included in the directly attributable emissions of the production process , but added under the 
parameter Em
H,import  in order to avoid double counting.  
Waste gases:  
The emissions caused by waste gases produced and fully consumed 
within the same production process are included in DirEm* . 
The emissions from the combustion of waste gases exported from the production process are fully included in DirEm*  irrespective of where 
they are consumed. However, for exports of waste gases the term 
WG corr,export  shall be calculated.  
Emissions from the c ombustion of waste gases imported from other 
production processes are not taken into account in DirEm*. Instead the term WG
corr,import  shall be calculated;  
92 𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝐻𝐻,𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖  are the emissions equivalent to the quantity of measurable heat imported 
to the production process, determined for the reporting period using the 
rules provided in Section C of Annex III to the Implementing 
Regulation, and the following rules:  
Emissions related to measurable heat imported to the production process include imports from other installations, other production processes within the same installation, as well as heat received from a technical unit (e.g. a central power house at the installation, or a more complex 
steam network with several heat producing units) that supplies heat to 
more than one production process.  
Emissions from measurable heat shall be calculated using the following formula:  
 𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚
𝐻𝐻,𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖=𝑄𝑄𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖∙𝐴𝐴𝐹𝐹ℎ𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒   
Where:  
EFheat is the emission factor for the production of measurable heat 
determined in accord ance with Section C.2 of Annex III to the 
Implementing Regulation , expressed in t  CO 2/TJ and  
Qimp is the net heat imported to and consumed in the production process 
expressed in TJ;  
𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝐻𝐻,𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑖𝑖  are the emissions equivalent to the quantity of measurable heat exported 
from the production process, determined for the reporting period using the rules provided in Section C of Annex III to  
the Implementing 
Regulation. For the exported heat either the emissions of the actually 
known fuel mix in accordance with Section C.2 of that Annex shall be used, or – if the actual fuel mix is unknown –  the standard emission 
factor of fuel most commonly used in the country and indus trial sector, 
assuming a boiler efficiency of 90%.  
Heat recovered from electricity -driven processes and from nitric acid 
production shall not be accounted;  
𝑊𝑊𝐺𝐺𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷,𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖  are the attributed direct emissions of a production process consuming 
waste g ases imported from other production processes , corrected for the 
reporting period using the following formula:  
 𝑊𝑊𝐺𝐺𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷,𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖=𝑉𝑉𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊·𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑉𝑉𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊·𝐴𝐴𝐹𝐹𝑁𝑁𝑊𝑊 
Where:  
VWG is the volume of the waste gas imported;  
NCV WG is the net calorific value of the waste gas imported, and  
EFNG is the standard emission factor of natural gas as given in 
Annex VIII to  the Implementing Regulation ; 
93 𝑊𝑊𝐺𝐺𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷,𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑖𝑖  are the emissions equivalent to the quantity of waste gases exported 
from the production process, determined for the reporting period using 
the rules provided in Section B of Annex III to the Implementing 
Regulation, and the following formula:  
 𝑊𝑊𝐺𝐺𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷,𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑖𝑖=𝑉𝑉𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊 ,𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑖𝑖·𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑉𝑉𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊·𝐴𝐴𝐹𝐹𝑁𝑁𝑊𝑊·𝑁𝑁𝐶𝐶𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝜂𝜂  
Where:  
VWG,exported  is the volume of waste gas exported from the production 
process ;  
NCV WG is the net calorific value of the waste gas;  
EFNG is the standard emission factor of natural gas as given in 
Annex VIII to  the Implementing Regulation ,  
Corr η is the factor that accounts for the difference in efficiencies 
between the use of waste gas and the use of the reference fuel natural gas. The sta ndard value is Corr
η = 0,667;  
𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒,𝑖𝑖𝐷𝐷𝑐𝑐𝑝𝑝  are the emissions equivalent to the quantity of electricity produced 
within the boundaries of the production process, determined for the 
reporting period using the rules provided in Section D of Annex III to  
the Implementing Regulation;  
 
 Attributed indir ect emissions  
 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚
𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖𝑝𝑝𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷=𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒,𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑖𝑖𝑐𝑐  
Where:  
𝑨𝑨𝑨𝑨𝑨𝑨𝑨𝑨𝑨𝑨𝒎𝒎𝑫𝑫𝒊𝒊𝒊𝒊𝑫𝑫𝑨𝑨  are the attributed indirect emission of the production process over the 
whole reporting period, expressed in t  CO 2e; 
𝑨𝑨𝒎𝒎𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆,𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒊𝒊𝒄𝒄  are the emissions equivalent to the quantity of electricity consumed 
within the boundaries of the production process, determined for the 
reporting period using the rules provided in Section D of Annex III to  
the Implementing Regulation. 
    
94 6.2.2.3 Calculation of embedded emissions of a good 
Adding precursors’ embedded emissions  
As has been said above in section 6.2.2, the last step for the de termination of embedded 
emissions is –  where applicable, i.e. only for ‘complex goods’ – to add the embedded 
emissions of any relevant precursors used in a production process to the attributed 
emissions of the process . However, if you produce precursors yourself in the same 
installation, and if you can use the ‘bubble approach’ (see section 6.3), the attributed emissions of this ‘bubble’ production process already include the emissions occurring during the production of the precursor. Therefore, users of the bubble approach need to 
perform the following calculation only with regard to any precur sors purchased  in 
addition to the self -produced ones.  
The following equations apply:  
𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴
𝑃𝑃𝐷𝐷𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 ,𝑝𝑝𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷=𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝑃𝑃𝐷𝐷𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 ,𝑝𝑝𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷+ �𝑀𝑀𝐷𝐷·𝑆𝑆𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐷𝐷,𝑝𝑝𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖
𝐷𝐷=1 
𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑃𝑃𝐷𝐷𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐,𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖𝑝𝑝𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷=𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝑃𝑃𝐷𝐷𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 ,𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖𝑝𝑝𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷+ �𝑀𝑀𝐷𝐷·𝑆𝑆𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐷𝐷,𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖𝑝𝑝𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖
𝐷𝐷=1 
Where  
EEProc,dir  are the embedded direct emissions at the level of the production process  over the 
reporting period;  
EEProc, indir are the embedded in direct emissions at the level of the production process over 
the reporting period;  
AttrEm Proc,dir  are the attribu ted direct emissions of the production process as determined in 
line with section 6.2.2.2 for the reporting period;  
AttrEm Proc,indir  are the attributed indirect emissions of the production process as determined 
in line with section 6.2.2.2 for the reporting period;  
Mi is the mass of precursor i  consumed in the production process during the reporting 
period;  
SEE i,dir are the specific direct embedded emissions of precursor i;  
SEE i,indir are the specific indirect embedded emissions of precursor i;  
If the precursor was produced within the same installation, you, as the operator, should determine SEE values using the rules of the Implementing Regulation yourself. In case you 
receive the precursors from other installations, you should have to request the relevant 
information from the oper ator of the installation where the precursor was produced. This 
95 is ideally done using the same template provided by the European Commission for 
communication between operators and importers (see section 6.11)64. 
If a precursor  material is received from different operators , it may have different SEE  
values for each operator . In this case, M i and SEE i values need to be used in the calculation 
separately as if it were different precursor materials.  
 
Specific embedded emissions (normalising to 1 tonne of product)  
Having performed all the above calculations, the embedded emissions at process level only 
need to be divided by the ‘activity level’ of the process in order to arrive at the specific 
embedded emissions of the produced goods:  
 𝑆𝑆𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑔𝑔,𝑝𝑝𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷=𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 ,𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑃𝑃
𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑔𝑔  
 𝑆𝑆𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑔𝑔,𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖𝑝𝑝𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷=𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 ,,𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑃𝑃
𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑔𝑔  
Where  
SEE g,dir are the specific direct embedded emissions of the goods under the aggregated 
goods category g;  
SEE g,indir are the specific indirect embedded emissions of the goods under the aggregated 
goods category g;  
ALg is the activity level of the production process producing goods of the aggregated goods 
category g, i.e. the mass of all goods of that category produced during the reporting period.  
Note  that these formulae seem to deviate from the formulae given in the CBAM Regulation 
Annex IV and in Annex III to  the I mplementing Regulation. However, they are 
mathematically equivalent. The difference is only that in this guidance we assume it to be easier to first determine the process -level data before dividing by the activity level. This 
method is also applied in the Commission’s communication template. However, the legislation gives formulae which do the addition of precursor’s embedded emissions in one single step with the normalisation to one tonne. For complex goods this reads as follows:  
 𝑆𝑆𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑔𝑔=𝐴𝐴𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝐷𝐷𝐸𝐸𝑖𝑖𝑔𝑔+𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼
𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑔𝑔  
 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐼𝐼𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝐼𝐼𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒=∑𝑀𝑀𝐷𝐷·𝑆𝑆𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖
𝐷𝐷=1   
In case of simple goods, EE inpMat  is simply equal to zero.  
The Implementing Regulation gives furthermore formulae for a general approach of first 
normalising the attributed emiss ions before calculating SEE as follows:  
 
64 Note that you will not only need the information on the specific embedded emissions of  the precursor, 
but also –  if applicable –  information on a carbon price due  (see section 6.10).  
96 The specific mass consumption m i for each precursor i : 𝑚𝑚𝐷𝐷=Mi/𝐴𝐴𝐿𝐿𝑔𝑔 
Thereby the specific embedded emissions of complex goods g may be expressed as:  
 𝑆𝑆𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑔𝑔=aeg+∑ (𝑚𝑚𝐷𝐷∙𝑆𝑆𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐷𝐷)𝑖𝑖
𝐷𝐷=1  
Where: 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑔𝑔 are the specifi c attributed direct or indirect emissions of the production process 
yielding goods g, expressed in t  CO 2e per tonne of g, being equivalent to specific 
embedded emissions without precursors’ embedded emissions:  
 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑔𝑔=𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝑔𝑔/𝐴𝐴𝐿𝐿𝑔𝑔  
In principle it is left to you, as the operator, to decide on the calculation path you choose, 
if you can demonstrate that the calculation gives the same results as above for SEE. However,  if you use the Commission’s template for communicating your product s’ 
embedded emissions to importers (or to other operators who use your goods as precursor), you can assume that the calculation is performed correctly .  
 
For SEE
i you, as the operator of the installation, should use the value of emissions resulting 
from the installation where the input material was produced, provided that that 
installation’s data can be adequately measured and its operator communicates all the 
required data. During the transitional period, default values for the embedded emissions, as pro vided by the European Commission, may be used where the precursor is a CBAM 
good. More information is given in section 6.9. 
  6.3 Defining production process system boundaries and production routes   
This section outlines the monitoring approaches available to you, as an operator, for the 
CBAM transitional period. The textbox below signposts the key sections in the Implementing Regulation  for monitoring, relevant for the CBAM transitional period.  
Implementing Regulation  references:  
Annex II, Section 3  Production routes, system boundaries, and relevant precursors  
Annex III, Section A Definitions and principles, in particular, sub-sections A. 4. Division of installations 
into production processes  
 
In order to  determine the embedded emissions of the aggregated goods categories covered 
by Section 2 of Annex II to the Implementing Regulation, you (as an operator ) need to 
define the system boundar y for the production of the good. This involves identifying:  
• All of the relevant production processes or equipment used during production of 
the CBAM good;   
97 • All of the fuel, energy (electricity, heat or waste gases65) and material flows into 
and out of these production processes; and   
• The sources of GHGs emitted directly from these production processes and , if 
relevant, during the production of the energy and precursor materials consumed.  
 
Step 1: List all goods, phys ical units, inputs, outputs and emissions for the installation   
Firstly, for your installation, list all production process physical units, inputs (e.g. raw 
materials, fuel, heat, and electricity input required for making the product s) and outputs 
(produced goods, by-products and waste, heat, electricity, waste gases  and emissions ). 
In order to satisfy the CBAM Regulation’s definition of “direct emissions”, heat imported must be taken into account (i.e. added to the installation’s total emissions). “I ndirect 
emissions” from electricity imports must also be taken into account. 
Step 2: Identify relevant production processes and production routes 
In this step you need to list all the goods with their CN codes which your installation produces. Using Table 1 of Section 2 o f Annex II to  the Implementing R egulation (or using 
section  5 of this guidance document), you can identify which goods are covered by the 
CBAM and by which one of the aggregated goods categories. Each aggregated goods category  you have identified as relevant will require one production process to be defined 
for the purpose of the next step. However, some simplifications (see below) are allowed.  
Then, identify the industrial processes  (the ‘production route’)  producing the CBAM  goods 
and the relevant process units, inputs, outputs and emissions.  Using a schematic diagram of your installation can be  a helpful way to visually identify 
the system boundaries. It is also important to identify units such as boilers, CHP plants and 
steam grids which may be used jointly by different production processes. The emissions 
of such units must be monitored separately, and attributed to the production processes 
according to the amount of heat consumed in the different production processes. 
In d efining the system boundaries of production processes, a number of different 
installation and production process configurations are possible:  
• If an installation makes a single category of good, the installation boundary and 
production process system boundary for monitoring and reporting embedded 
emissions are the same.  
• If an installation makes several different unrelated categories of good, separate 
production process system boundaries must be defined within the single installation.  
• If an installation make s the same category of good by different production routes, 
you, as an operator, may define either a single production process system boundary, or separate production process system boundaries of the different production routes. If you assign separate processes, the embedded emissions of the goods are calculated separately for each production route. 
 
65  For definition of ‘waste gases’ please see section 6.7.5 . 
98 • If an installation makes a category of complex good and its precursor and  where 
this precursor is wholly used to make the complex good, a joint (single) 
product ion process system boundary may be defined within the installation 
(‘bubble approach’66). 
• If an installation also produces non- CBAM goods alongside CBAM goods, only 
production process system boundar ies needs to be defined for the processes 
relating to CBAM goods within the installation. However, a recommended  
improvement from the basic requirements would be to also define an additional production process system boundary for the non -CBAM good, in order to confirm 
all relevan t emissions have been covered.  
In addition to the above, a number of simplifications  apply for certain sectors  in the 
transitional period, namely for:  
• Iron and steel installations  producing two or more goods from specific product 
groups
67 may monitor and report embedded emissions defining one joint 
production process , provided that none of the produced precursor materials are 
sold separately  (i.e. the ‘bubble approach’ may be used) ; 
• Aluminium installations  producing two or more goods from unwrought 
aluminium or aluminium product groups may monitor and report embedded emissions defining one joint production process , provided that none of the 
produced precursor materials are sold separately  (i.e. the ‘bubble approach’ may 
be used) ; and  
• Mixed fertili zers installations  may simplify the monitoring of the respective 
production process by determining one uniform value of embedded emissions per tonne of nitrogen contained in the mixed fertili zers, irrespective of the chemical 
form of nitrogen (ammonium, nitrate  or urea forms).  
 
In defining the system boundaries of a production process, key criteria  are: 
• The system boundaries should enclose the physical units
68 performing the 
sequential process steps to produce the good;  
• Any other (100%) dedicated units  that support the production process and allows 
it to reach and maintain its full production capacity should be included in the 
system boundary – for example CHP units (input activity) or flue gas scrubbing 
(output activity). 
• Physical units used by more than one production process (e.g. boilers supplying steam to several processes) need to be virtually split (by treating their emissions 
separately in accordance with the formulae provided in section 6.2.2.2);  
• Only stationary units are included in the system boundary – emissions from 
vehicles ( forklifts , trucks, bulldozers etc.) are not included in the system 
boundary of a production process.  
 
66  See section 7.2.2.1 for an example of the bubble approach.  
67  Sintered ore, pig iron, FeMn, FeC r, FeNi, DRI, crude steel, iron or steel products  
68  “Units” means industrial equipment such as kilns, furnaces, boilers, reactors, distillation columns, 
dryers, flue gas cleaning, etc.  
99 Overall, the relevant emissions of an installation should be 100% covered between CBAM 
goods and any non-CBAM goods, whereby: 
• For an installation with a single production process, all (100%) relevant emissions 
from the installation should be attributed to the CBAM good production process.  
• For an installation with several relevant production processes, you, as an operator , 
should where necessary attribute shared equipment, ‘source streams’ and 
emission sources between the different production processes identified. 
Therefore, all inputs, outputs and corresponding emissions in your installation should be 
attributed to a production process, unless they relate to any non-CBAM good.   
You should take particular care to ensure that  production processes do not overlap, i.e. 
inputs, outputs and corresponding emissions should not be covered by more than one production process. 
You should also note that, for transparency purposes, the rationale for any production 
processes defined in the CBAM transitional period may need to be provided in the 
subsequent definitive period, to the verifier and the authority who checks the CBAM declarations.  
Recommended improvement :  
List all emission sources and source streams of the total installation, in order to perform completeness 
checks, as well as to control the energy and emissions efficiency of the installation as a whole.  
 
Section 7.1.2 provides an example of how to define separate production processes for the 
different CBAM goods of a notional installation in the cement sector.  
 
Step 3: Determine monitoring needs on installation level  
Once you have identified all the CBAM -relevant production processes  and the related 
emission sources and source streams (i.e. fuels and materials contributing to emissions), 
you need to decide on the monitoring approaches. At installation level, ‘calculation -based’ 
and ‘measurement -based’ approaches are available, or for some of the transition al period 
other methods from other carbon pricing or MRV systems. More details on the applicable methods are presented in section 6.4. 
In some cases, additional material or energy flows need to be monitored which take place 
between production processes, and which are not necessary for installat ion-level emission 
monitoring. For example, a waste gas resulting from the production of pig iron, which is consumed in the production of iron or steel products downstream, would not have to be separately monitored at installation level. For attribution to  different production processes 
and subsequently to goods, such monitoring is necessary and needs to be identified for the next step. 
100 Step 4: Assign emissions to production process es  
Once the methods for determining total emissions of an installation have been determined, 
you must ensure to have all data for splitting  the emissions according to the production 
processes defined and the goods produced.  
In this step, this is done without considering embedded emissions of precursor materials 
used. Instead, each good is considered a “simple good”, i.e. only the (direct and/or indirect) emissions from each  production process is taken into account. If an installation also 
produces some precursor materials, they are to be co nsidered separately as individual 
goods themselves. 
At this stage the aim is to attribute 100% of the installation’s emissions to goods, without 
gaps and double counting. Note that in this context “electricity” and “heat” produced for use outside of the production process are also “goods” (they have an economic value and can be traded). Also, goods which are not covered by the CBAM have to be considered in order to reach this 100% target.  
 6.4 Planning your monitoring  
This section outlines the monitoring approaches available to you, as an operator, over the 
CBAM transitional period. The textbox below signposts the key sections in the Implementing Regulation for monitoring, relevant for the CBAM transitional period. 
 
Implementing Regulation refer ences:  
Annex III, Section A Definitions and principles, in particular, sub- sections: - A.1. Overall approach; - 
A.2. Monitoring princ iples; - A.3. Methods representing the best available data source; - A.4. Division of 
installations into production proces s.  
Annex III, Section B Monitoring of direct emissions, in particular, sub- sections: - B.1. Completeness of 
source stream and emissions sources; - B.2. Choice of monitoring methodology; - B.4. Requirements for 
activity data; - B.5. Requirements for calcul ation factors for CO 2. 
Annex III, Section E Monitoring of precursors.  
Annex III, Section F Rules for attributing emis sions of an installation to goods . 
Annex III, Section H Optional measures to increase quality of data . 
 
6.4.1 What documentation is needed to plan your monitoring  
As an operator, you should document the monitoring methodologies used to determine the 
CBAM emissions and production data for your installation and production processes. This monitoring methodology documentation (MMD) should define the system boundaries of your installation and each of your production processes, in line with the specific requirements for each industry sector. The MMD should also identify which source 
streams use a calculation -based stand ard or mass balance method, and for which emission 
sources a measurement -based approach is used. It should also contain all other relevant 
101 monitoring approaches, such as for the qualities and quantities of CBAM goods produced, 
heat, electricity and waste g as flows, as applicable.  
It is recommended that you, as an operator, also produce a diagram and accompanying 
process description of your installation, to help:  
• Visualise production process system boundaries and source streams;  
• Confirm that there is no double counting of, or data gaps in emissions reporting. 
A good document management system is advisable from the outset. To help with this the MMD should ideally be  collated into a single document, comparable to the  ‘Monitoring 
Plan’ (MP) known in other carbon pricing or MRV systems (and in the EU ETS) . 
  
6.4.2 Monitoring methodology principles and procedures  
As an operator, you are required to document a monitoring methodology to ensure that all 
the monitoring activities are carried out consistently from one year to the next. In this 
regard, t he MMD serves  as a “rule book” for all your installation staff, as well as for 
training of new staff involved in the monitoring. Should you want to use a GHG verifier voluntarily, the MMD will serve as essential background information for the verifier.  
 
Guiding principles for planning your monitoring:  
• As simple  monitoring methodology as possible , which takes into account 
existing syste ms in place at your CBAM installation and is based on using the 
most reliable data sources , robust metering instruments, short data flows, and 
effective control procedures . 
• Full transparency  and traceability of how data is compiled, for the purposes of 
verification in the definitive period of your CBAM  data, stating any calculations 
or assumptions  made and what controls are in place to ensure data accuracy.  
• Supplementary written procedures , providing clear instructions for activities 
implemented under the MMD , locations of relevant data and setting out roles and 
responsibilities.  
As installations undergo technical changes over the years, the MMD and written 
procedures should be considered livi ng documents that should be regularly reviewed  and 
updated by you, as the operator.  
Typical elements of a monitoring methodology involve the following activities for you, as 
the operator (as applicable, depending on the installation’s specificities):  
• Data collection (metering data, invoices, production protocols, stock determination etc.) . 
• Sampling of materials and fuels . 
• Laboratory analyses of fuels and materials . 
• Maintenance and calibration of meters . 
• Description of the calculations and formulae to be us ed. 
102 • Documentation of standard values used and their sources . 
• Control activities (e.g. four -eyes principle for data collection) . 
• Data archiving (including security to guard against manipulation) . 
• Regular identification of improvement possibilities (you should attempt to 
improve their monitoring systems wherever possible). 
Recommended improvement:  you should regularly check (at least once per year) whether new and more 
accurate data sources have become available, for the purpose of improving the monitoring approaches.  
 
6.4.3 Written procedures  
Written procedures that supplement the monitoring methodology should include the 
following elements: 
• Managing responsibilities and competency of personnel – description of roles and 
assignation of responsibilities to key members of staff.  
• Data flow and control procedures.  
• Quality assurance measures (checks to be carried out).  
• Estimation method(s) for substituting data where data gaps are identified.  
• Regular review of the monitoring methodology for i ts appropriateness.  
• A sampling plan and process for revision, if required.  
• Procedures for methods of analyses, if applicable.  
• Procedure for demonstrating evidence for equivalence to EN ISO/IEC 17025 
accreditation of laboratories, if relevant.  
• Procedures fo r use of measurement -based methodologies, including for 
corroborating calculations and for subtracting biomass emissions, if relevant. 
• Procedure for regular review and update of the list of products and precursors produced and/or imported by an installation. 
You, as the operator, should make sure that all versions of the monitoring documents and 
procedures are clearly identifiable, and that the most recent versions are always being used by all staff involved.  
 
6.4.4 Choosing best available data sources  
Section A.3 of Annex III to the Implementing Regulation contains details about the general 
principle that “ best available data sources ” should be used for any kind of monitoring for 
the purpose of determining embedded emissions of goods falling under the C BAM. In this 
context:  
103 • “Best” means primarily the most accurate69 option to determine the required 
data. This implies e.g. that when you decide which of two measurement 
instruments for the same variable should be used, you should choose the one 
where the op erator  specifies the lowest “error in use” for the environment in 
which you use it. Furthermore, where there are instruments under “legal 
metrological control” (i.e. instruments officially verified under some legislation, e.g. for ensuring accepted measure ments for trading of fuels), these should be  
preferred due to their defined characteristics.   
However, “best” includes also  the element of data processing. Where personnel 
have to read a value every hour or every day, then write them down in a journal, which is then manually transferred into an electronic spreadsheet, and where that spreadsheet is not well protected against (u nwanted) editing, there are significant 
risks in the ‘data flow’ which requires specific ‘control procedures’ (see section 6.4.6). A better data sou rce would be one that delivers automatically data from 
e.g. a process control system to a data base which can be used for extracting data without danger of manipulation. Therefore, “best” involves those data sources with lowest risk of errors on the data f low. 
• “Available ” means  in the first place that you as an operator have the data source 
already available, e.g. because the parameters measured are important for your process control or cost calculation etc. If this is not the case, a choice has to be 
made:  Will you purchase an additional measurement system, will you establish a 
system for sampling materials and performing laboratory analyses, for the purpose of the CBAM? Or do you have the possibility to use other methods, including “indirect” ones (s ee bel ow), or are there literature sources that provide 
reasonable and credible standard values for the parameter you require for monitoring (e.g. a standard value for the emission factor of a fuel)?`  
The legislation provides significant flexibility for answerin g the above questions. 
Although “best” sources should be used, the legislation acknowledges that administrative burden and costs should be limited. To this end, the concepts of “technical feasibility ” and “ unreasonable costs ” (see section 6.4.5) are 
introduced. These allow you to go for “2
nd best” (or even 3rd best”) data sources, 
if the best one would not be feasible or involve unreasonable costs. 
Furthermore , the legislation allows you to use measurements “not under the 
operator’s control” , if necessary. This means that e.g. if your fuel supplier 
already determines the net calorific value and emission factor of your fuel, or if 
the supplier owns the flow meter or weigh bridge used for determining the sold 
fuel quantity, these data may be used for the purpose of the CBAM, and you do 
not have to purchase your ow n equipment or analyses. Nevertheless it is to be 
noted, that the use of monitoring under the operator’s own control is preferred, 
where possible.  
• “Data sources ” means  everything needed for determining all the parameters 
occurring in the monitoring at emis sions level, at production process level and for 
determining embedded emissions of goods. On an abstract level, this involves in 
particular the determination of quantities  of fuels, materials, energy flows etc. 
and of quality  of these flows (carbon content  of materials , temperature, pressure 
and saturation of steam, etc.). While more concrete details are given in the 
 
69  More precisely, the aim is to have lowest uncertainty  of measuremen ts, which includes both concepts, 
high accuracy (the closeness of the measured value to the “true value”) and high precision  (low 
variability of measurements).  
104 following sections , which deal with the different parameters, on this abstract 
level, the following methods are distinguished by the legislati on: 
o Direct determination : This means e.g. the direct reading of a flow meter 
for natural gas, the weighing of a truck delivering coal, etc., and regarding 
quality t means applying directly a standard value for an emission factor, or performing laboratory a nalyses to determine the carbon content of a 
material directly. Where more than one parameter is required
70, it is 
considered ‘direct determination’ if all the parameters are actually measured.  
o Indirect determination : This is also referred to often as ‘est imation 
method’. Here you, as the operator, have to make several assumptions, and look for measurements which are somehow connected by a scientifically sound reasoning. For example, if you have a boiler for producing steam but you do not have heat meters, you may use the boiler 
producer’s specified efficiency in order to calculate the heat amounts based on the fuel consumed. Method B for cement clinker process emissions is in principle also an indirect method: From the amount of CaO and MgO contained in the  clinker, one calculates back to the amount of 
carbonates that are assumed to have been present in the raw meal (the 
scientific context here is stoichiometry and the likelihood that no other carbonates were present).  
It is to be noted that direct determina tion methods are preferred, but for 
limiting administrative costs, indirect methods are acceptable.  
o Correlations : These are an “improved indirect method”, applicable in 
particular for qualitative parameters of fuels. Most prominently, coal emission factors  can often be determined based on correlations between 
the ash, the calorific value, and the emission factor to be determined. Some process gases can be characterised by using density or thermal conductivity correlating with the gas’ composition (carbon content).  
Such correlations need to be regularly (annually) confirmed by laboratory analyses, and are therefore considered “better” than using standard emission factors (which are fixed values), but not as “best” as actual 
laboratory analyses with representative sampling.  
Where you, as the operator of an installation, find that you have more than one data source for the same parameter available, you should choose the “best” one for monitoring, and 
put it into the monitoring methodology documentation as the “p rimary data source”. 
However, you should not discard all other data sources, but define them as a “corroborating 
data source”, and use the values from that source for checking regularly the consistency of 
the data with the “primary” data source. It thereby  serves your ‘control system’ (see section 
6.4.6).  
Overall, there is no absolute “right” or “wrong” in selecting data sources . However, it is to 
be expected that over time you as operator will collect experience with your data sources 
and f ind confirmation whether the chosen sources are “best” indeed. Furthermore, new 
technologies may become available or less costly, and your installation may undergo 
 
70  In particular for determining net heat flows, where the flow of steam, the temperature, press ure and 
saturation, and the amount and temperature of returned condensate are required.  
105 changes. Therefore, the legislation foresees that regular (annual) review of the monitoring 
methodology should be performed.  
 
6.4.5 Limiting monitoring -related costs  
As indicated in section 6.4.4, the Implementing Regulation allows the operator to limit the 
costs caused by monitoring for the purpose of the CBAM, firstly by using existing methods and equipment, to the extent feasible, and secondly by allowing deviation from the preferred approaches, if a monitoring approach is either “technically not feasible”, or if it incurs “unreasonable costs”. These criteria are discussed in more detail in this section.  
Determining whether costs a re reasonable or not  
Point 8 of section A.3 of Annex III to  the implementing Regulation explains that for 
identifying costs as “unreasonable”, the costs of a monitoring approach or improvement 
measure must exceed its benefit.  
As an operator, you should therefore  carry out a cost/benefit analys is, for the specific 
determination methodology for the data set concerned, to determine whether costs are 
unreasonable or not. If you then decide that the costs are unreasonable, this calculation 
should be included in the monitoring methodology documentation as a justification for not 
choosing a certain approach.  
The calculation methodology to use is provided in the Implementing Regulation. The 
benefit calculation  includes the following:  Improvement × CO
2e reference price.  
• The improvement is calculated by m ultiplying the expected percentage 
improvement in uncertainty in a measurement, or 1% where no improvement  can 
be quantified, by the related emissions71). 
• The reference price is EUR 20 per tonne72 of CO 2e.  
Cost calculation:  In considering what costs to include in this calculation, you should only 
include those costs that are additional to their existing reference system , i.e. the 
incremental cost compared to either existing equipment, or for a more expensive (but more accurate) item minus the cost of the e quipment that would have been purchased without 
the CBAM.  In this context, the types of costs that should be considered are:  
• Investment costs – for new equipment , if applicable.  The cost for the new 
equipment should be the cost per annum depreciated over its economic lifetime e.g. depreciated on a straight -line basis.  
• Operating and maintenance costs – such as for annual calibration services.  
 
71  Related emissions are the direct emissions over the reporting period caused by the source stream or 
emission source concerned, which may be: the emissions attributed to a quantity of measurable heat; the 
indirect emissions related to the quantity of  electricity concerned; or the embedded emissions of a 
material produced or of a precursor consumed.  
72 This CO 2 price is significantly lower than the actual CO 2 price in the EU ETS , which helps limiting 
monitoring costs, as more measures are considered “unreasonable” than by using the actual CO 2 price.  
106 • Costs due to disrupted operations – due to plant shutdowns to install new 
equipment (to mitigate this you, as the operator, may consider timing this to 
happen at the same time as the annual plant shut down for maintenance); and/or  
• Any other reasonable resulting costs. 
When you have calculated the above, and the costs exceed the benefit, you are free to choose a less costly monitoring approach or equipment, because costs are considered ‘unreasonable’.  
Please note that minor costs are never considered unreasonable. To this end, a threshold is 
defined of EUR 2  000 per year . Below this amount,  costs are always considered to be 
reasonable  additional costs for taking measures to improve an installation's monitoring 
approach, in line with the monitoring obligations of the CBAM. Technically feasible  
The second concept for avoiding more costly monitoring approaches is based on ‘technical 
feasibility’. A measure is considered “not technically feasible”, where the installation has 
not the technical resources for meeting the needs of a proposed data source or monitoring method so it  can be implemented in the required time for the purposes of the CBAM. This 
can be e.g. the case if there is no space available to install a technical equipment, if there are safety concerns , or if the technology is not available in the country. Technical 
infeasibility is usually closely linked with unreasonable costs. 
 
6.4.6 Control measures and quality management   
It is commonly accepted best practice in carbon pricing and GHG monitoring systems that 
the operator ensures an effective control system for the data flows relevant for the emissions monitoring. Although the Implementing Regulation for the CBAM in Annex III section H clarifies that such measures are purely optional, implementation of such control system is in the be st own interest of the operator. Here we outline only briefly how to set 
up a control system. 
Step 1: Perform a (simple) risk assessment:  
Map out all the data flows from the first point where data occurs (e.g. the fuel invoices, the 
reading of an instrument in the installation), how it is written  down or entered in an IT 
system, how it is used in calculations until it ends up in the final embedded emissions data which you communicate to EU importers under the C BAM.  
Then you identify points with a high risk for errors (high risk means that either the likelihood of the error is high, or that the impact of the error on emissions is very high, or both factors are at least “medium”).  
Step 2: Establish effective cont rols 
For the identified “high risk” points (and ideally also at least for the “medium risk” points) you need a control measure. If for example there is a high risk for  a measurement 
instrument to fail, for  copy & paste errors when data is transferred from a paper -based 
production journal to a spreadsheet, or where data on a computer is freely accessible to 
107 your whole staff, measures need to be taken. The same applies if there is a risk for 
incomplete data (e.g. because fuel suppliers are chronically late in  sending invoices, etc.). 
Step 3: Regularly evaluate if the control measures are effective.  
Control measures  (non-exhaustive) 
One simple measure with a very good cost/benefit ratio is the application of the “four -
eyes” principle, i.e. that all data flows a re controlled by a second person which is 
independent from the main person doing the data compilations73.  
Further more , the implementing Regulation lists the following areas that may require 
attention: 
• Quality assurance of the relevant measurement equipmen t (calibration and 
maintenance);  
• Quality assurance of information technology systems; 
• Segregation of duties in the data flow activities and control activities,  
• Management of necessary competence of staff;  
• Internal reviews and validation of data (this can be done by comparing time series and by performing checks against different data sources, e.g. whether energy efficiency in a process is explainable over time / after improvement measures);  
• Corrections and corrective action, where instruments or procedures fail, or where errors (e.g. double counting of fuel or material qualities) happen; 
• Control of out- sourced processes  (e.g. where laboratories outside the installation 
are involved, or where instruments not under the operator’s control are used); and  
• Keepin g records and documentation including the management of document 
versions. 
 
6.5 Determine installation’s direct emissions  
The CBAM Regulation builds on the principle of  applying a  top-down approach  to 
calculating embedded emissions, starting from the installation level, and splitting those 
emissions such that they are attributed to different production processes, and thereafter to products, with further embedded emissions added for precursor materia ls.
74 In this sub -
section  we provide guidance on how these calculations can be carried out. 
 
73  Independence means e.g. if an accountant controls the head of environmental, safety & health 
department who is the main responsible for data collection. Note that regarding competence, both persons need to be trained in the basic concepts of GHG emissions monitoring for the CBAM.  
74  Embedded emissions could theoret ically  also be calculated using a bottom -up approach. The starting 
point would be the product to be imported, which is traced through the value chain until all emissions 
from all previous production steps are added up. In practice, it is usually simpler to monitor the total 
emissions of a defined installation, since there is usually one main metering device for each fuel which is used in the whole installation, whereas there are less often sub- meters which allow the split of fuel 
quantity to individual production processes, so that is the method required by the Implementing Regulation for the CBAM . 
108 The emissions at installation level can be monitored by different approaches, which can 
also be combined, provided that neither gaps nor double counting occur . 
As an operator, you should select a monitoring methodology on the basis that it gives the 
most accurate and reliable results (see section 6.4.4), e xcept where a particular method is 
required for sector -specific reasons. The monitoring methodologies allowed under the 
CBAM are:  
• Calculation -based approaches , which entails determining emissions from 
source streams on the basis of activity data (such as f uel consumption data) and 
additional parameters from laboratory analyses or standard values, as necessary. 
Either the ‘standard methodology’ (which distinguishes combustion and process 
emissions) or ‘mass- balance methodology’ may be used.  
• Measurement -based  approach , which requires a continuous emissions 
monitoring system (CEMS) to directly measure emissions from emissions sources.  
• Other non -EU country -specific methods , where they are part of an existing 
carbon pricing scheme, or a compulsory emission monitoring scheme, or an 
emission monitoring scheme at the installation which can include verification by 
an accredited verifier (this could be e.g. a GHG reduction project), and where 
they lead to similar outcomes as the approaches provided by the Implementing Regulation, in terms of coverage and accuracy of emissions data (see section 6.5.3). Such systems may also methods like , for example, Predictive Emission 
Monitoring Systems  (PEMS) . 
You can also use a combination of the above approaches, provided that there is no double -
counting or data gaps in the emissions reporting, which allows different parts of your installation to be monitored by either of the allowed approaches.  
 
Figure 6- 4: Overview of installation emissions  
 
 
Installation emissionsCalculated emissions of all source streams
Measured emissions of all emission sources
Emissions determined by other methods e.g. PEMS
109 The above Figure 6-4 illustrates how the installation’s emissions are calculated according 
to the Implementing Regulation Annex III , which is in detail:  
 𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝐼𝐼𝑖𝑖 𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑒 =∑𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑐𝑐,𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖
𝐷𝐷=1 +∑𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝑖𝑖𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑐𝑐 ,𝑗𝑗𝑖𝑖
𝑗𝑗=1 + ∑𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑒ℎ𝑒𝑒𝐷𝐷,𝑘𝑘𝑒𝑒
𝑘𝑘=1  
Wh
ere: 
Em Inst are the (direct) emissions of the installation expressed in tonnes CO 2e; 
Em calc,i are the emissions from source stream i  determined using a calculation- based 
methodology expressed in tonnes CO 2e; 
Em meas,j are the emissions from emission source j determined using a measurement -based 
methodology expressed in tonnes CO 2e, and  
Em other,k  Emissions determined by another method, index k  expressed in tonnes CO 2e. 
For the definition of the terms ‘source stream’ and ‘emission source’ please see section 
6.2.2.1. Regarding “other methods” please see section 6.5.3. 
During the transitional period , indirect emissions  must also be reported  for all sectors . 
This section is structured as follows: 
• Everything regarding the calculation- based method  will be summarised in 
section 6.5.1: 
o The standard methodology is discussed in section 6.5.1.1 (with separate 
sub-sections for combustion and process emissions); 
o The mass balance  method is presented in section 6.5.1.2; 
o Rules for determining activity data  are relevant for both, standard and 
mass balance method. The requirements are given in section 6.5.1.3; 
o Likewise, requirements for the calculation factors  apply to both methods. 
The relevant rules (either choosing appropriate standard values , using 
correlations or performing laboratory analyses  and the related  sampling ) 
are given in section 6.5.1.4; 
• The measurement -based method (using Continuous Emission Measurement 
Systems, CEMS ) is subject of section 6.5.2. It is of particular importance for 
monitoring of nitrous oxide (N 2O) emissions in the fertiliz er sector.  
• Section 6.5.3 elaborates on the possibility to use “ non- EU methods ”, i.e. 
monitoring methods other than those given in the CBAM Implementing Regulation. 
• Since CO
2 emissions from biomass  may be considered to be zero under certain 
conditions, section 6.5.4 gives guidance on the respective rules. These rules apply to all methods, i.e. calculation- based,  measurement -based and “non- EU” 
methods. 
• The topic of PFC (perfluorocarbon)  emissions is shortly touched in section 
6.5.5. 
• Finally, rules for trans fers of CO
2 between installations are mentioned in section 
6.5.6. 
110 The determination of indirect emissions of an installation is thereafter discussed in section 
6.6. From section 6.7 onwards, the rules are described that are necessary for splitting 
(‘attributing’) the installation’s direct and indirect emissions to production processes. A 
completely different type of data to be reported is any effective carbon price due. Nevertheless , it should be on the operator’s agenda and documented in the monitoring 
methodology. It is therefore discussed in section 6.10. Finally, section 6.11 describes the 
template for communicating the monitored data to EU importers who have to prepare the quarterly CBAM reports.  
 
6.5.1 Calculation -based approach 
6.5.1.1 Standard methodology 
The standard approach is straightforward to apply in cases where a fuel or materia l is 
directly related to the emissions. It entails the calculation of emissions by means of activity 
data  (e.g. amount of fuel or process input material consumed) multiplied by an emission 
factor ; two other factors may be applied for correcting the emissions numbers in case of 
incomplete chemical reactions, based on laboratory analyses, namely the oxidation factor  
for combustion emissions, and the conversion factor  for process emissions.   
Key requirements for using the standard method are:  
• Combustion emis sions  – Minimum requirements: Fuel quantity (t or m
3), 
Emission factor (t CO 2/t or t CO 2/m3); Recommended improvement : Fuel 
quantity (t or m3), NCV (TJ/t or TJ/m3), Emission factor (t CO 2/TJ), Oxidation 
factor, Biomass fraction. 
• Process emissions  – Minimum requirements : Activity data (t or m3), Emission 
factor (t CO 2/t or t CO 2/m3); Recommended improvement : Activity data (t or m3), 
Emission factor (t CO 2/t or t CO 2/m3), conversion factor . 
Standard method formulae for combustion and process emissio ns and parameters are given in the 
Implementing Regulation Annex III, section B.3.1, and are discussed in further detail below.  
 
Combustion emissions75 
Combustion emissions are calculated as  
𝐴𝐴
𝑚𝑚=𝐴𝐴
𝐷𝐷 ∙𝐴𝐴
𝐹𝐹∙𝑂𝑂
𝐹𝐹 
Where:  
Em…Emissions [t CO 2] 
AD…Activity data [TJ], calculated as AD=FQ∙NCV   
EF…Emission factor [t CO 2/TJ, t CO 2/t or t CO 2/Nm3] 
OF…Oxidation factor (dimensionless), calculated as OF= 1−Cash/Ctotal 
And: 
 
75  ‘Combustion emissions’ are defined by the Implementing Regulation as greenhouse gas emissions 
occurring during the exothermic reaction of a fuel with oxygen. 
111 
Simplified!  FQ… Fuel quantity [t or m3] 
NCV… Net Calorific V alue (lower heating value) [TJ/t or TJ/m3] 
Cash… Carbon contained in ash and flue gas cleaning dust (soot)  
Ctotal… Total carbon contained in the fuel combusted 
Factors with units in tonnes are usually to be used for solids and liquids. Nm3 are usually 
used for gaseous fuels. In orde r to achieve numbers of similar magnitude, values are 
usually given in [1000 Nm3] in practice.  
The oxidation factor  for combustion emissions is typically determined by laboratory 
analyses. The two C variables, above, are expressed as [tonnes C] i.e. the quantity of 
material or fuel times the concentration of carbon in it. Therefore, not only the carbon content of the ash has to be determined by analysis, but also the amount of ash must be determined for the period for which the oxidation factor is determine d. 
In order to reduce monitoring effort, you, as an operator, may always use the conservative 
assumption that OF = 1 . 
For combustion emissions, the emission factor is usually expressed in relation to the energy content (NCV) of the fuel rather than its mass or volume : 
• If the emission factor of a fuel is to be calcul ated from the analyses of carbon 
content and NCV, the following equation is used: 𝐴𝐴𝐹𝐹𝐷𝐷= 𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝐷𝐷∙𝑓𝑓
𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑉𝑉𝑑𝑑 
• If the emission factor of a material or fuel expressed as t  CO 2/t is to be calculated 
from an analysed carbon content, the following equation is use d: 𝐴𝐴𝐹𝐹𝐷𝐷=𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝐷𝐷∙𝑓𝑓 
Where f  is the ratio of molar mass of CO 2 to C: f = 3,664 t  CO 2/t C 
It is acceptable to modify the above approach, where you have  evidence that higher 
accuracy can be achieved, as follows:  
• Activity data is expressed as fuel quantity (i.e. in t or m3), rather than using the 
above equation;  
• EF is expressed as t  CO 2/t fuel or t  CO 2/m3 fuel, as applicable;  and 
• NCV can be omitted from th e calculation  if an EF expressed as t  CO 2/t fuel is used. 
However, a recommended improvement  is to report NCV for allowing consistency 
checking and your own monitoring of the energy efficiency of the whole 
production process.  
Where biomass  is used as a fuel for combustion and it complies with the sustainability and 
GHG emissions saving criteria established by the ‘Renewable Energy Directive’  
(RED  II)76, it may be zero -rated for emissions. This applies for accounting purposes only, 
while physically, still CO 2 is emitted from the installation.  Details on these “RED II 
criteria” are given in section 6.5.4. 
 
76  Directive (EU) 2018/2001 (2018) on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources (recast). 
See: http://data.europa.eu/eli/dir/2018/2001/2022- 06-07  
112 
Simplified!  Where mixed fuels (i.e. fuels wh ich contain both fossil and biomass components) are used,  
the emission factor must be determined from the preliminary emission factor and the 
biomass fraction of the fuel according to the following equation:  
𝐴𝐴𝐹𝐹=𝐴𝐴𝐹𝐹𝑖𝑖𝐷𝐷𝑒𝑒∙(1−𝐵𝐵𝐹𝐹) 
Where:  
EF…Emission factor  
EFpre… preliminary emission factor (i.e. emission factor assuming the total fuel is 
fossil)  
BF… Biomass Fraction (dimension- less) 
For fossil fuels and where the biomass fraction is unknown, BF is set to the conservative value zero.  
 
Process emissions
77 
Process emissions are calculated as  
𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚 =𝐴𝐴𝐷𝐷 ∙𝐴𝐴𝐹𝐹∙𝑁𝑁𝐹𝐹 
Where:  
Em…Emissions [t CO 2] 
AD…Activity data [t of material]  
EF…Emission factor [t CO 2 / t] 
CF…Conversion factor (dimension- less) 
You may use the conservative assumption that the CF = 1  in order to reduce monitoring 
effort.  
Activity data in the above equation may refer to either : an input material ; or, to the resulting 
output from the process. For this purpose , two methods f or calculating process emissions 
are possible Method A (input based) and Method B (output based).  
Both methods are considered equivalent . However, Method B (output base d) may only be 
used where CO 2 process emissions are from carbonates . For CO 2 process emissions 
other than from carbonates, only method A should be used. An important case of carbonate 
process emissions occur during flue gas desulphurisation which need to be included in 
 
77  ‘Process emissions’ are defined by the Implementing Regulation as greenhouse gas emissions  other 
than combustion emissions occurring as a result of intentional and unintentional reactions between 
substances or their transformation, for a primary  purpose other than the generation of heat , including 
from the following processes:   
(a) the chemical, electrolytic or pyrometallurgical reduction of metal compounds in ores, concentrates 
and secondary materials;   
(b) the removal of impurities from metals and metal compounds;   
(c) the decomposition of carbonates, including those used for flue gas cleaning;   
(d) chemical syntheses of products and intermediate products where the carbon bearing material 
participates in the reaction;   
(e) the use of carbon cont aining additives or raw materials;    
(f) the chemical or electrolytic reduction of metalloid oxides or non- metal oxides such as silicon oxides 
and phosphates.  
113 the calculation of the emissions related to heat, electricity and CHP units (see sections 6.7.2 
to 6.7.4)78. 
Carbonate materials  process emissions  
For calculating process emissions from the thermal decomposition of carbonate -based 
(inorganic) materials, either of two methods  is possible:  
• Method A (input based):  The emission factor, conversion factor and activity 
data are related to the amount of mater ial input (carbonates) into the process, for 
which the standard emission factors for carbonates in the Implementing Regulation, Annex VIII, Section 2, Table 3 should be used (taking into account  
the composition of the material) .  
• Method B (output based):  The emission factor, conversion factor and activity 
data are related to the amount of material output (metal oxides) from the process, 
for which standard emission factors for metal oxides in the Implementing 
Regulation, Annex VIII, Section 2, Table 4 should be used (taking into account 
the composition of the material).  
The standard factors mentioned can also be found in Annex E  of this guidance 
document. 
In choosing which method to use, the method giving the more accurate results for each 
source stream  should be used , taking into account the available measurement systems 
for activity data , and that avoids  unreasonable costs.  
Mixed materi als process emissions  
In case of mixed process input materials , which contain inorganic as well as organic forms 
of carbon, you may choose  to:  
• Determine a  total preliminary emission factor for the mixed material by analysing 
the total carbon content, and using a conversion factor and – if applicable – biomass 
fraction and net calorific value related to that total carbon content; or  
• Determine t he organic and inorganic contents separately and treat them as two 
separate source streams.  
In both cases, Method A is to be applied. For the biomass fraction of mixed materials , the 
emission factor for biomass may be set to zero, provided the main purpose of the materi al’s 
use is different from energy production (i.e. it needs to be clarified that it is really compliant with the definition of ‘process emissions’
77). If the main purpose is heat generation, the 
“RED II” criteria have to be met  for allowing zero- rating of the emissions , as discussed 
under section 6.5.4 on ‘Rules for biomass’.  
6.5.1.2 Mass balance method  
Like the standard approach, the mass balance approach is a calculation -based method for 
determining the emissions of an installation. It is used with complex installations, for example at an integrated steelworks, where it may be difficult to link the emis sions directly 
to individual input materials, because the products (and wastes) contain significant amounts of carbon.  
 
78  A second type of process emissions for flue gas cleaning occurs where urea is used for removing NO x. 
114 Using a mass balance approach, a complete balance of carbon entering and leaving the 
installation or a defined part thereof is used. The CO 2 quantities relevant for each source 
stream are calculated based on the carbon content in each material, without distinguishing fuels and process materials. Non -emitted carbon leaving the installation in products is 
taken into account by output source s treams, which have therefore negative activity data. 
Mass balance method formulae and parameters are set out in the Implementing Regulation  Annex III, 
section B.3.2.  
 
• Key requirements for using the mass balance approach method are: Minimum 
requirement: Material quantity (t), Carbon content (t C /t material); 
Recommended improvement : Material quantity (t), Carbon content (t C /t 
material), NCV (TJ/t), biomass fraction. 
The following remarks should be considered when setting up a monitoring approach  using 
a mass balance:  
• Emissions of carbon m onoxide (CO) to the atmosphere are not counted as 
outgoing source stream in the mass balance, but are considered as the molar 
equivalent amount of CO 2 emissions. This is easily accomplished by just not 
listing the CO as outgoing material.  
• It is important to comply with the principle of completeness of the monitoring data, i.e. all input materials and fuels must be taken into account, if not monitored by an approach outside the mass balance.  
The mass balance is implemented by calculating emissions corresponding to each source 
stream as follows : 𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝑘𝑘=𝑓𝑓∙𝐴𝐴𝐷𝐷𝑘𝑘∙𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑘𝑘 
Where:  
AD k … activity data [t] of material k ; for outputs, AD k is negative;  
f is the ratio of the molar masses of CO 2 and C: f  = 3.664 t CO 2/t C, and 
CC k is the carbon content of material k  (dimensionless and positive). 
If the carbon content of a fuel k  is calculated from an emission factor expressed in t  CO 2/TJ, 
the following equation shall be used:  𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑘𝑘=𝐴𝐴𝐹𝐹𝑘𝑘∙𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑉𝑉𝑘𝑘/𝑓𝑓  
If the carbon content of a material or fuel k  is calculated from an emission factor expressed 
in t CO 2/t, the following equation shall be used: 𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑘𝑘=𝐴𝐴𝐹𝐹𝑘𝑘/𝑓𝑓 
Treatment of biomass in mass balances  
Emissions from biomass may be zero- rated if the biomass complies with the “RED  II 
criteria” (see 6.5.4). Since those criteria apply only to energeti c use of biomass, it must be 
established for such source streams if they are used primarily for energy purpoeses. For 
example, charcoal used as reducing agent in a blast furnace will qualify as primary nopn-energetic use.  
For mixed fuels or materials containing biomass being included  as inputs  in a mass 
balance, the preliminary carbon content is to be adjusted for the fossil fraction only. Where the biomass fraction is not known, it should be taken as if there was no biomass used:  
115  𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑘𝑘=𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑖𝑖𝐷𝐷𝑒𝑒 ,𝑘𝑘∙(1−𝐵𝐵𝐹𝐹𝑘𝑘) 
Where:  
CC pre,k is the preliminary carbon content of fuel k  (i.e. emission factor assuming the total 
fuel is fossil) and  
BFk is the Biomass Fraction of fuel k  (dimensionless). 
Where biomass is used as input material or fuel, and output materials contain carbon, the 
overall mass balance shall treat the biomass fraction conservatively, meaning that the fraction of biomass in total output carbon shall not exceed the total fraction of biomass contained in input materials and fuels, except if the operator provides evidence of a higher biomass fraction in the output materials by a “trace the atom” (stoichiometric) method or by 
14C analyses.  
 
6.5.1.3 Rules for activity data  
Section B.4 of Annex III to  the Implementing Regulation provides the requirements for 
determining activity data. Two generic approaches are applicable:  
• Continual metering  at the process where the material is consumed or produced;  
• Batch -wise determination: Quantities separately (batch -wise) delivered or 
produced are added up over the reporting year taking into account relevant stock 
changes. For this purpose, the following formulae shall apply:  
o Cons = I – E + S start – S end  
o Prod = E – I – S start + S end  
Where Cons  is the amount of fuel or material consumed during the reporting period, I is 
the amount of the fuel or material ‘imported’79 to the installation during the reporting 
period, E is the amount of the fuel or material ‘exported’80 from the installation during the 
reporting period, Sstart is the stock at the start of the reporting period and S end is the stock 
at the end of the reporting period. 
Where you as an operator find that it would incur unreasonable costs (see section 6.4.5) to 
determine quantities in stock by direct measurement, those quantities may be estimated 
either based on data from previous years and correlated wi th appropriate activity levels for 
the reporting period, or based on documented procedures and respective data in audited 
financial statements for the reporting period. Furthermore, if using the exact date at the end 
of the reporting period leads to unreas onable costs, the next most appropriate day may be 
chosen to separate a reporting period from the following one. The deviations involved for 
each product, material or fuel are to be clearly recorded to form the basis of a value 
representative for the repor ting period and to be considered consistently in relation to the 
next year.  
 
79  ‘Import’ to the installation includes purchases as well as amounts received without commercial 
transaction, e.g. materials received from the operator’s own mining sites.  
80  ‘Export’ from the installation includes sales as well as amounts transfe rred out of the installation for 
other purposes, e.g. materials sent to an external waste treatment or scrap recycling plant.  
116 According to the Implementing Regulation, it is preferred that you use measurements 
which are under your, the operator’s control. However, if your installation does not have the relevant measurement instruments available, it is acceptable for limiting the monitoring costs to use other measurements, in particular instruments belonging to the supplier of fuels or materials, where a commercial transaction is involved, which requires a quality of 
instruments that enables mutual trust (these ore often instruments under ‘legal metrological control’). Using such instruments outside the operator’s control is furthermore recommended in case they lead to more accurate results than the operator ’s own 
instruments, or if there are other reasons that lead to a lower risk of errors in the data flow (see section 6.4.6 on control measures).  
If you as operator make use of a measurement systems outside your own control, you may 
either use direct readings from that measurement system, if possible, or amounts taken 
from invoices issued by the  trade partner . 
Requirements for measurement systems 
The key concept for judging the quality of a measuring instrument is the ‘uncertainty’ 
associated with the values read from the instrument. As an operator, you need a thorough understanding of that concept for making a choice on the “best” data source. See for this purpose also section 6.4.4 (Choosing best available data sources ). The Implementing 
Regulation gives a range for orientation: For the biggest emissions (source streams leading to emissions of more than 500 000 t CO
2 per year), the uncertainty over the full reporting 
should be 1,5 % or better, while for the smallest sources, uncertainty lower than 7,5 % is 
considered acceptable. These values are understood to apply if they do not lead to unreasonable costs.  
Where you have to replace a measuring instrument , e.g. because of malfunction or because 
calibration shows that the desired uncertainty is not met anymore, you should replace it by 
an instrument  that ensure s meeting the same or a better uncertainty level compared to the 
existing instrument. (i.e. you should a lways strive for improvement of the monitoring 
method, but at least keep the existing standard).  
 
6.5.1.4 Rules for calculation factors  
Calculation factors are all variables used in the calculation -based approaches except the 
activity data. This section covers rules for the emission factor (EF), net calorific value 
(NCV), oxidation factor (OF), conversion factor (CF), carbon content (CC) and biomass 
fraction (BF) for the formulae given in sections 6.5. 1.1 (standard methof) and 6.5.1.2 (mass 
balance).  
In principle, calculation facto rs are the qualitative information  on the source streams, 
which can be determined by laboratory analyses. However, as these involve significant 
efforts and require specialised competence, the calculation factors are often set to fixed 
values in the monitor ing methodology. This is justified as – on average over a whole GHG 
reporting system – the y provide sufficiently representative data.  
The calculation factors need to be determined consistently with the state used for related 
activity data. For example, if  the activity data relates to coal weighted as taken from pile, 
which may contain significant moisture from rain or dust prevention, then also NCV and 
carbon content have to be determined with the same moisture level. If the laboratory 
117 analyses are carried  out on dry material, the activity data must be adjusted accordingly for 
moisture, or vice versa.  
The Implementing Regulation allows the following methods for setting calculation factors 
(with increasing data quality, i.e. the first ones are meant for rat her small source streams, 
while for the largest emissions the best type of analyses is recommended):  
1. Fixed values  (“type I standard values ”); 
2. Fixed Values (“type II standard values ”); 
3. Correlations  for determining proxy data;  
4. Laboratory analyses  carried out outside the operator’s control, e.g. by the 
supplier of the fuel or material, contained in purchase documents, without further information on the methods applied;  
5. Laboratory analyses in non- accredited laboratories, or in accredited laboratories, 
but with simplified sampling methods; and  
6. Laboratory analyses in accredited laboratories, applying best practice regarding 
sampling. 
 
Fixed values  
As an operator, you can choose from a relatively large set of options to find the most 
appropriate value f or each of the calculation factors of each source stream you need to 
monitor. For ensuring consistency over time and for preventing arbitrary changes in the data, you must lay down in the writen monitoring methodology documentation (MMD) which values you a re using. In some cases (e.g. national GHG inventories of the country 
where the installation is situated), these values may change over time. In such case you need to document and implement a procedure which allows regular updating this value (in this exam ple, the procedure would e.g. entail that a defined person is responsible for once 
a year before compiling all emissions data to look up the latest national GHG inventory and determine the required factor from there).  
The following are considered ‘ Type I s tandard values ’:  
• Standard factors provided in Annex VIII to  the Implementing Regulation  
(attached to this guidance document as Annex E );  
• Standard factors contained in the latest IPCC guidelines for GHG inventories
81; 
• Values based on laboratory analyses carried out in the past, not older than 5  years 
and considered representative for the fuel or material.  
The following are considered ‘ Type II standard values ’ (considered more accurate than 
‘Type I’ values) : 
 
81  United Nations International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC): IPCC Guidelines for National 
Greenhouse Gas Inventories. Note tha t also the values in Annex VIII to the Implementing Regulation 
are taken from this source, but the IPCC guidelines contain more data than that annex.  
118 • Standard factors used by the country where the installation is located for its latest 
national inventory submission to the Secretariat of the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change;  
• Values published by national research institutions, public authorities, 
standardisation bodies, statistical offices etc. for the purpose of more disaggregated emissions reporting than under the previous point
82; 
• Values specified and guaranteed by the supplier of a fuel or material where there 
is evidence that the carbon content exhibits a 95 % confidence interval of not more than 1 %
83; 
• Stoichiometric values for the carbon content and related literature values for the 
net calorific value (NCV) of a pure substance;  
• Values based on laboratory analyses carried out in the past not older than two 
years and considered representative for the fuel or material.  
 
Correlations for determining proxy data 
You may determine a  proxy for the carbon content or emission factor from the following 
parameters:  
• Density measurement of specific oils or gases, including those common to the 
refinery or steel industry;  
• Net calorific value for specific coal types.  
The pre -condition for using such correlation is that you can establish an empirical 
correlation at least once per year usiong laboratory analyses meeting the requirements 
given below. The difference to using directly analyses for determining the calculation factor s lies in the fact that you need to carry out the analyses only once a year for 
establishing the correlations, and not for each batch of material. This reduces the overall costs of your monitoring. 
Requirements for laboratory analyses  
This section applies to all types of laboratory analyses required for determining properties 
of materials and for determ ining correlations (see above). Note that this is not limited to 
source streams and the calculation -based approaches, but may also relate to the goods 
produc ed
84 and to all measurements used for measurement -based approaches.  
For each batch of material or fuel subject to analyses, a representative sample is required. Analysis results shall only be used in calculation in respect of the batch from which the sample was taken.  
 
82  For example, the national GHG inventory may use only one emission factor for coal in the country, but 
a research institute may have published different factors representative for different coal mines or mining 
regions. If you know the source of your coal, these factors will be more appropriate to use.  
83  If this variation level is not complied with, the value would be considered a ‘Type I’ value.  
84  See sector -specific sections in section 7  which mention additional parameters that need to be reported 
together with em bedded emission.  
119 Any analyses, sampling, calibrations and validations f or the determination of calculation 
factors shall be carried out by applying methods based on corresponding ISO standards. 
Where such standards are not available, the methods shall be based on suitable (European) EN or national standards or requirements la id down in an ‘ eligible MRV system ’ (see 
section 6.5.3) . Where no applicable published standards exist, suitable draft standards, 
industry best prac tice guidelines or other scientifically proven methodologies may be used, 
limiting sampling and measurement bias.  
Analysis frequency  
The number of analyses per fuel or material per year strongly impacts the overall costs for monitoring. It is therefore des irable not to carry out too many analyses. However, where 
materials are very heterogeneous, more analyses are required. Below we discuss the required or recommended analyses frequency. This must not be misunderstood as the frequency of taking samples, whic h is discussed therefater.  
The Implementing Regulation in Section B.5.4.2 contains a table with minimum frequencies of analyses for different material types. These build on experience in the EU 
ETS for being useful orders of magnitude. If you as an operator want to deviate from this table, you should consider the following:  
• If your installation is applying an ‘eligible MRV system’ (see section 6.5.3), you may use the analysis frequency applicable in that system for the same type of material or fuel; 
• If the minimum frequency listed in would incur unreasonable cost;  
• If the fuel or material  is sufficiently homogenous ( demonstrated based on data  
from recent reporting periods) , you may apply lower analysis frequencies. This is 
the case if any variation in the analytical values for the respective fuel or material 
does not exceed 1/3 of the unce rtainty that you apply in determining the activity 
data of the relevant fuel or material.  
If the table does not contain an applicable minimum frequency, the best choice is to use 
this 1/3 rule, i.e. to chose to analyse as frequently as it leads to this 1/3 uncertainty over 
the whole reporting period.  
Table 6-1: Minimum analyses frequencies  in accordance with the Implementing Regulation  
Fuel/material  Minimum frequency of analyses  
Natural gas  At least weekly  
Other gases, in particular synthesis gas and process gases such as refinery mixed gas, coke oven gas, blast -furnace gas, convertor 
gas, oilfield, and gas field  gas At least daily — using appropriate procedures at different parts of the day  
Fuel oils (for example light, medium, heavy 
fuel oil, bitumen)  Every 20 000 tonnes of fuel and at least six times a year  
Coal, coking coal, coke, petroleum coke, peat Every 20 000 tonnes of fuel/material and at least six times a year  
Other fuels  Every 10 000 tonnes of fuel and at least 
four times a year  
120 Fuel/material  Minimum frequency of analyses  
Untreated solid waste (pure fossil or mixed 
biomass/fossil)  Every 5 000 tonnes of waste and at least four times a year  
Liquid waste, pre -treated solid waste  Every 10 000 tonnes of waste and at least four times a year  
Carbonate minerals (including limestone and dolomite)  Every 50 000 tonnes of material and at least four times a year  
Clays and shales  Amounts of material corresponding to emissions of 50 000 tonnes of CO
2 and at 
least four times a year  
Other materials (primary, intermediate, and final product)  Depending on the type of material and the variation, amounts of material 
corresponding to emissions of 50 000 
tonnes of CO
2 and at least four times a year  
 
Note regarding “number of  times a year” in Table 6-1 above : Where an installation 
operates for part of the year only, or where fuels or materials are delivered in batches t hat 
are consumed over more than one reporting period, a more appropriate schedule for 
analyses may be chosen, provided that it results in a comparable uncertainty as under the last point of the previous subparagraph.  
 
Frequency of Sampling” versus “Frequen cy of Analyses”85 
The Implementing Regulation refers to “Frequency of Analyses” in Annex III section 
B.5.4.2. Depending on the specific situation, the operator may note in the MMD e.g. that 
the minimum frequency of analyses of the emission factor of a cert ain source stream is 
four times a year.  
This term “Frequency of Analyses” must not be confused with the “Frequency of 
Sampling”, i.e. the frequency of taking samples or increments from a batch or delivery of a fuel or material. In general, a lot more sampl es/increments than four have to be 
taken over the year to obtain representative results.  
Example : A coal firing plant is burning 500 000 tonnes of coal a year. In accordance 
with Table 6-1, the operator is required as a minimum to ana lyse every 20 000 tonnes of 
coal. This will at least result in 25 different laboratory samples that are analysed each year. The main 
objective of the sampling plan, which also includes the frequency of 
sampling, is to prepare (at least) 25 laboratory samples that are re presentative for each 
of the 20 000 tonne batches. In order to have representative laboratory samples more than just one sample/increment will have to be taken from each 20 000 tonne batch.  
 
 
85  Text based on Guidance Document No.5 on EU ETS Monitoring and Reporting (“Sampling and 
Analyses”), https://climate.ec.eur opa.eu/system/files/2021-
10/policy_ets_monitoring_gd5_sampling_analysis_en.pdf    
121 Sampling  
Samples shall be representative for the total batch or time period of deliveries for which 
they are taken. In order to ensure representativeness, the heterogenety of the mate rial has 
to be taken into account, as well as all other relevant aspects such as the avilable sampling equipment, possible segregation of phases or local distribution of particle sizes, stability of samples, etc. The sampling method shall be laid down in t he monitoring methodology 
documentation.  
It is recommended to use a dedicated sampling plan  for each relevant material o r fuel, 
following applicable standards, containing the relevant information on methodologies for 
the preparation of samples, including information on responsibilities, locations, frequencies and quantities, and methodologies for the storage and transport of samples.  
More detailed guidance on sampling plans (although from perspective of the EU ETS instead of the CBAM) can be found in the C ommission’s EU ETS Guidance document 
No.5 (see footnote 85).  
Recommendations for laboratories  
Laboratories used to carry out analyses for the determination of calculation factors shall be accredited in accordance with ISO/IEC 17025, for the relevant analytical methods. Laboratories not accredited may be used for the determination of calculation factors only where there is evidence that access to  accredited laboratories is technically not feasible or 
would incur unreasonable costs  (see section 6.4.5 ), and that the non- accredited laboratory 
is sufficiently competent. A laboratory is considered sufficiently competent if it fulfils all 
of the following criteria : 
• It is economically independent of the operator, or at least organisationally 
shielded from influence by the management of the installa tion; 
• It applies the applicable standards for the analyses requested;  
• It employs personnel competent for the specific tasks assigned;  
• It appropriately manages the sampling and sample preparation, including control 
of sample integrity; 
• It regularly carries out quality assurance on calibrations, sampling and analytical 
methods, by suitable methods, including regular participation in proficiency testing schemes, applying analytical methods to certified reference materials, or inter-comparison with an accredited laboratory; and  
• It manages equipment appropriately, including by maintaining and implementing 
procedures for calibration, adjustment, maintenance and repair of equipment, and record keeping thereof.  
 
Determining the biomass fraction  
For the determination  of the biomass fraction some additional rules are to be taken into 
account:  
• Biomass fraction needs to be determined only for mixed materials which contain 
biomass and fossil fractions. For pure fossil fuels, the biomass fraction is zero. For pure biomass, it is one (100%).  
122 • If the biomass fraction is hard to analyse or if as an operator you do not want to 
make use of zero -rating (e.g. because the biomass fraction is very small anyway), 
you may apply the conservative approach to assume the whole material to be 
fossil.  
• Only biomass which complies with the “RED II criteria” (see section 6.5.4) may be counted as “biomass fraction”. Any remaining other biomass is counted as part of the fossil fraction. 
Additional guidance:  
• If you want to determine the biomass fraction by laboratory analyses, the appropriate standard to use is ISO 21644:2021 (Solid recovered fuels – Methods for the determination of biomass content) or EN 15440 (Solid recovered fuels – Methods for the determination of biomass content). These standards offer three methods  (selective dissolution method; manual sorting method; 
14C method). All 
three methods have advantages and disadvantages. Therefore, the method to be used must be carefully selected for the specific purpose of the source stream at hand, taking into account the limitations of each method as described in the standard.  
• As industrial installations often use wastes from defined production processes from their own or from neighbouring installations, the composition of the wastes is often well- known. It is therefo re an acceptable approach to determine the 
biomass fraction based on a kind of mass balance of the process producing the waste, where possible. For example, if wastes from a wood particle board producer are combusted, it may be possible to determine the bi omass fraction 
(wood) and fossil fraction (resins) from the “recipe” of the boards.  
 
6.5.2 Measurement -based Methodology  – Continuous Emission Measurement 
Systems (CEMS)  
In contrast to the calculation -based approaches, the greenhouse gases in the installation’s  
off-gases in the stack may be measured. This is difficult in installations with many 
emission points (stacks) or indeed impossible where fugitive emissions have to be taken 
into account. On the other hand, the strength of the measurement -based methodologi es is 
the independence of the number of different fuels and materials used (e.g. where many different waste types are combusted).  
The application of CEMS (Continuous Emission Measurement Systems) always requires two elements: 
• Measurement of the GHG concent ration; and  
• Measurement of the v olumetric flow of the gas stream where the measurement 
takes place.  
The CBAM Implementing Regulation require s the mandatory use of the measurement -
based approach for the monitoring of N
2O emissions, where this is defined as a relevant 
greenhouse gas emission for the CBAM good (i.e. for nitric acid and fertiliz er production) . 
The Implementing Regulation gives deta iled requirements in Section B.6 of Annex III. 
The essential requirements are summarised here.  
123 Calculating the emissions of a reporting period (annual emissions)  
 𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺  𝐴𝐴𝑀𝑀𝑒𝑒𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒 [𝐴𝐴]= ∑ �𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺  𝑐𝑐𝐶𝐶𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐ℎ𝑐𝑐𝑜𝑜𝐷𝐷𝑒𝑒𝑜𝑜 ,𝐷𝐷∙𝑉𝑉ℎ𝑐𝑐𝑜𝑜𝐷𝐷𝑒𝑒𝑜𝑜 ,𝐷𝐷� ∙10−6[𝐴𝐴/𝑔𝑔] 𝐻𝐻𝑐𝑐𝑜𝑜𝐷𝐷𝑐𝑐𝐻𝐻𝑖𝑖
𝐷𝐷=1  
Where:  
GHG Em total are the total annual GHG emissions in tonnes;  GHG conc hourly, i  are the hourly 
concentrations of GHG emissions in g/Nm3 in the flue gas flow measured during operation 
for hour or shorter reference period i ; Vhourly, i  is the flue gas volume in Nm3 for one hour i, 
determined by integrating the flow rate over the hour , and HoursOp  = are the total number 
of hours for which the measurement -based methodology is applied, including the hours for 
which data has been substituted in accordance with Section B.6.2.6 of this Annex. The 
index i  refers to the individual operating hour.  
Hourly values shall be averages over all individual m easurements during that hour. Note 
that instead of full hours other reference periods (e.g. half -hours) may be used, if this fits 
better to the configuration of the measuring instrument or to requirements for 
measurements for other purposes carried out at the installation .  
CO 2 emissions from biomass  
Where relevant, any CO 2 amount stemming from biomass which complies with the 
“RED  II criteria” (see s ection 6.5.4) may be subtracted from the total measured CO 2 
emissions . For this purpose, one of the following methods must be used to determine the 
amount of biomass CO 2 emissions:  
1. A calculation -based methodology, determining the biomass fractions of all used 
source streams separately;  
2. Methodologies using analyses and sampling based on ISO 13833 (Stationary 
source emissions — Determination of the ratio of biomass (biogenic) and fossil -
derived carbon dioxide — Radiocarbon sampling and determination);  
3. The ‘balance method’ based on ISO 18466 (Stationary source emissions —  
Determination of the biogenic fraction in CO 2 in stack gas using the balance 
method);  
4. Other methods based on internat ional standards;  
5. Other methods  allowed by an eligible MRV  system  (see section 6.5.3) . 
Determination of flue gas flow  
The measurement of the flue gas flow is difficult, as the measuring point(s) must be 
selected such that measurment is representative for the whole stack’s cross section (see also “quality requirements ” below). Therefore, as an alternative method, flow may be 
calculated using a suitable mass balance. This would have to take into account , for CO
2 
emissions: all significant parameters on the input side, including at least input material 
loads, input airflow and process efficiency, and on the output side  at least t he product 
output and the concentration of oxygen (O 2), sulphur dioxide (SO 2) and nitrogen oxides 
(NO X).  
124 Treatment of measurement gaps  
Where the continuous measurement equipment for a parameter is out of control, out of 
range or out of operation for part of the hour or reference period, the related hourly average shall be calculated pro rata to the remaining data points for that specific hour or shorter reference period, provided that at least 80 % of the maximum number of data points for a 
parameter are available.  Where fewer than 80  % of the maximum number of data points 
for a parameter are available, the following calculation is used:  
 𝑁𝑁
𝑐𝑐𝑜𝑜𝑠𝑠𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑒∗=𝑁𝑁̅+2 𝜎𝜎𝑐𝑐 
Where:  𝑁𝑁̅ is the arithmetic mean of the concentration of the specific parameter over the 
whole reporting period or, where specific circumstances applied when data loss occurred, 
an appropriate period reflecting the specific circumstances and 𝜎𝜎 𝑐𝑐 is the best estima te of 
the standard deviation of the concentration of the specific parameter over the whole 
reporting or, where specific circumstances applied when data loss occurred, an appropriate period reflecting the specific circumstances.  
Where the reporting period i s not applicable for determining such substitution values due 
to significant technical changes at the installation, another sufficiently representative timeframe shall be chosen for determining the average and standard deviation, where possible with the duration of at least 6 months. 
In the case of a parameter other than concentration, substitute values shall be determined 
through a suitable mass balance model or an energy balance of the process. This model shall be validated by using the remaining measured parameters of the measurement -based 
methodology and data at regular working conditions, considering a time period of the same duration as the data gap.  
Quality requirements  
All measurements shall be carried out applying methods based on international stan dards, 
such as : 
• ISO 20181:2023 Stationary source emissions — Quality assurance of automated measuring systems ; 
• ISO 14164:1999 Stationary source emissions — Determination of the volume 
flowrate of gas streams in ducts — Automated method;  
• ISO 14385- 1:2014 St ationary source emissions — Greenhouse gases — Part 1: 
Calibration of automated measuring systems ; 
• ISO 14385- 2:2014 Stationary source emissions — Greenhouse gases — Part 2: 
Ongoing quality control of automated measuring systems ; 
• other relevant ISO standard s, in particular ISO  16911- 2 (Stationary source 
emissions — Manual and automatic determination of velocity and volume flow 
rate in ducts).  
Where no applicable published standards exist, suitable draft standards, industry best practice guidelines or other s cientifically proven methodologies shall be used, limiting 
sampling and measurement bias.  
125 All relevant aspects of the continuous measurement system shall be considered, including 
the location of the equipment, calibration, measurement, quality assurance a nd quality 
control. For competence requirement of the laboratory, see section 6.5.1.4.  
Further requirements  
CO 2 emissions determined by a measurement -based methodology shall be corroborated 
by calculating the annual emissions of each greenhouse gas in question for the same 
emission sources and source streams. For this purpose, the requirements for calculation -
based  approaches  may be simplified as appropriate. 
Where CO 2 is measured, any amounts of carbon m onoxide (CO) emitted shall be taken 
into account as the molar equivalent of CO 2. 
 
6.5.3 Non-EU count ry specific methods  
The Implementing Regulation defines an ‘eligible MRV system’ as follows: 
‘Eligible monitoring, reporting and verification system’ means the monitoring, 
reporting and verification systems where the installation is established for the 
purpose of a carbon pricing scheme, or compulsory emission monitoring schemes, or an emission monitoring scheme at the installation which can include verification by an accredited verifier, in accordance with Article 4(2) of this Regulation.  
The mentioned Article 4(2) allows the use of monitoring approaches of an el igible MRV 
system until 31 December 2024,  if they lead to similar coverage and accuracy of 
emissions data compared to the methods listed in Annex III to  the Implementing 
Regulation (i.e. the calculation -based and measurement -based approaches as discussed in 
sections 6.5.1 and 6.5.2).  
In practice, for you as an operator of an installation producing goods to be imported into 
the EU that  fall under the scope of the CBAM, this means:  
• You have to develop your monitoring methodology as soon as possible. Importers will require your first data on emissions for their first report by the end of January 2024, covering embedded emissions of goods imported from October to 
December 2023.  
• If your installation  is already under an ‘eligible MRV system’, you do not start 
from scratch, and you can use (at least some) data from that system for a 
transition period until then end of 2024.  
How can you find out if your installation is covered by an eligible MRV system , so you 
can use its methods during start -up of the CBAM? This is the case if either of the following 
applies:  
• The installation is participating in a ‘carbon pricing scheme’, that can be either an emission trading system (ETS), or a carbon tax, levy or fee . For eligibility it is 
important that this scheme is mandatory and regulated by a legislation, i.e. GHG 
emissions monitoring rules exist;  
126 • The installation is participating in a compulsory GHG reporting scheme, i.e. only 
monitoring and reporting (and perha ps verification) are mandatory, but there is no 
carbon pricing involved;  
• The installation participates in an emission monitoring scheme at the installation 
(non- mandatory) , which can include verification by an accredited verifier; for 
eligibility, again it can be assumed that a fixed set of monitoring rules provided by an accepted governance body must exist. Certain GHG reduction projects, such as e.g. under the CDM (the UN’s Clean Development Mechanism), may qualify. 
In any event, before you start to use t hose MRV systems’ rules, you have to perform a 
check whether they lead to similar coverage and accuracy of emissions data.  
 
6.5.4 Treatment of biomass emissions  
The textbox below signposts the key sections for biomass in the Implementing Regulation, 
relevant for the CBAM transitional period.  
Implementing Regulation references:  
Annex III, Section B Monitoring of direct emissions, B.3.3 Criteria for zero -rating of biomass emissions 
and B.6.2.3 CO 2 emissions from biomass  (CEMS).  
Annex VIII, Standard factors used in the monitoring of direct emissions, Table 2.  
 
Under the rules for GHG inventories established by the IPCC and used under the Paris 
agreement, CO 2 emissions of biomass are accounted for at the point where the biomass is 
harvested ( e.g. when a forest is felled). To avoid double counting i t is therefore logical to 
“zero -rate” these emissions , i.e. to account for  the CO 2 emissions as zero, where biomass 
is consumed as fuel or process material, despite the fact that CO 2 is physically emitted to 
the atmosphere at that point. EU climate policy has found that this type of accounting may 
lead to some unintended incentive to use biomass excessively with unfavourable 
environmental impacts (e.g. on biodiversity and soil quality). Therefore, the EU’s legal 
instrument for encouraging the use of renewable energy, the “RED II” (re -cast Renewable 
Energy Directive86), introduced a set of “ sustainability and GHG savings criteria ” 
(which are summarised as “RED II criteria ” in this guida nce document) , which have to 
be met for zero -rating biomass emissions. The monitoring rules under the EU  ETS require 
that those criteria have to be met for zero -rating biomass emissions . Otherwise , the 
emissions are treated as if they were from fossil sour ces. The CBAM Implementing 
Regulation requires the same criteria to be met in order to achieve the goal to put a 
similar CO 2 price on goods produced outside the EU as to those produced in the EU and 
under the EU ETS.  
Since the correct application of the “RED II criteria” is a relatively complex task , which is 
potentially only relevant for a relatively small number of installations, this section gives 
 
86  Directive (EU) 2018/2001, on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources (recast). See: 
http://data.europa.eu/eli/dir/2018/2001/2022- 06-07  
127 only a quick overview of the most relevant points. A more detailed explanation of the 
applicable RED II cri teria is given in Annex D  of this document. 
It is recommended that you, as an operator, include a written procedure in your Monitoring methodology documentation to attribute each batch of biomass used in the installation to either a ‘RED II compliant biomass’ source stream or to a ‘non- RED II compliant biomass’ 
source stream, depending on whether the sustainability and/or greenhouse gas criteria are met, or not.  
Note that RED II criteria apply only where biomass is used as a fuel  (“for energy 
purposes”). Where biomass is used a process input  (e.g. where charcoal is used as 
reduction agent in a blast furnace or for producing electrodes), such material may always 
be zero -rated without applying RED  II criteria.  
Demonstrating compliance with RED II criteria  
There are two ways in which operators can demonstrate compliance with the RED  II 
sustainability and GHG savings criteria:  
• Using a certification  scheme that provides  ‘proofs of sustainability’  (PoS, i.e. a 
confirmation of compliance with that scheme’s rules) and that complies with the 
requirements of the RED  and the relevant implementing Regulation
87.  
Such certification schemes can operate world -wide. If you as an operator want to 
be certain whether the scheme complies with all the relevant Regulations under the 
RED  II, you should select a schew that has been ‘recognised’ (i.e. approved) by the 
European Commission under these rules.88  
• You can also collect all relevant data and  perform relevant calculations 
yourself , as operator of the installation using the biomass. Annex D  of this 
guidance document explains the principles for this approach.  
 
6.5.5 Determine PFC (perfluorocarbon) emissions  
Section B.7 of Annex III  to the Implementing Regulation describes the determination of 
PFC (Perfluorocarbon)  emissions. PFC emissions are currently only covered by the CBAM 
for Aluminium goods . The gases to be monitored are CF 4 and C 2F6. Emissions from anode 
effects as well as fugitive emissions are to be included.  The method is based on the 
guidance “Aluminium sector greenhouse gas protocol” published by the International 
Aluminium Institute (IAI)89. This uses a calculation -based approach which significantly 
deviates from the calculation -based approach outlined in section 6.5.1. Two different 
methods are allowed: The “slope method” and the “overvoltage method”. Which method 
is to be applied depends on the installation’s process control equipment.  
While the Implementing Regulation describes the principal  requirements and calculation 
formulae, other details on the applicable methods should be taken from the guidance 
 
87  Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/996 on rules to verify sustainability and greenhouse 
gas emissions saving criteria […], http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_impl/2022/996/oj  
88  A list of recognised biomass certification schemes is hosted on the Commission’s website:   
https://energy.ec.europa.eu/topics/rene wable -energy/bioenergy/voluntary -schemes_en   
89 Available from  https://ghgprotocol.org/sites/default/files/2023 -03/aluminium_1.pdf   
128 mentioned above. Note that on top of the PFC emissions, CO 2 emissions from anode 
consumption in primary aluminium production are to be included in embedded emissions. 
Also , all fuel -related emissions from secondary aluminium production as well as from 
diverse forming steps downstream of aluminium melting need to be covered. For that 
purpos e, the usual calculation -based methods apply.  
More details are given in the section on special rules for the Aluminium sector (section 
7.4.1.2).  
 
6.5.6 Rules for transfers of CO 2 between installations   
Specific rules apply for how emissions are attributed where CO 2 is transferred between 
installations, where either: i) pure or almost pure CO 2 is being transferred, for example , 
for use as a chemical feedstock for urea production; or ii) CO 2 that is already an inherent 
part of a waste gas or other gaseous source stream is transferred.  
The text box below gives the references to the relevant annex sections. 
Implementing Regulation references:  
Annex III, Section B .8 Requirements for monitoring of CO 2 transfers between installations  
 
The following sections cover the attribution of direct emissions from CO 2 in these 
circumstances.  
6.5.6.1 Accounting for inherent CO 2 in waste gases and other gaseous source streams  
The term ‘inherent CO 2’ refers to CO 2 which is contained in a gas, such as natural gas, or 
in a waste gas source stream, which is then recovered as a fuel or is flared. In order to 
ensure consistent reporting and avoid double counting, the inherent CO 2 is either accounted 
for in the CBAM installation in which it originates or in the CBAM installation to which it is transferred, whereby:  
• The originating CBAM installation that transfers out a source stream cont aining 
inherent CO
2 to another CBAM installation:  
o Subtracts the CO 2 from its emissions – usually this is done using  a 
mass balance, where the inherent CO 2 is treated in the same way as any 
other carbon in that outgoing source stream.  
o An exception  is where the inherent CO 2 is transferred then emitted 
(vented or flared ) or is transferred to a non -CBAM installation or one that 
does not participate in an eligi ble MRV system, in which case the inherent 
CO 2 has to be counted as emissions from the originating CBAM 
installation.  
• Where a receiving CBAM installation transfers in and uses a source stream 
containing inherent CO 2: 
o The emission factor (or in case of mass  balances, the carbon content) 
takes into account the inherent CO 2 (i.e. the CO 2 forms a part of the 
129 source stream, and the inherent CO 2 counts as emitted by the installation 
which emits the CO 2). 
Regarding metering transfers, the same monitoring approach as for the transfer of waste 
gases is applicable.  
Note that the above rules apply to the direct emissions at installation level. For the purpose of calculating attributed emissions of a production process, the formulae given in section 6.2.2.2 apply. 
6.5.6.2 Capture and transfers of CO
2 between installations  (CCS and CCU)  
Where pure or almost pure CO 2 emissions are captured at an installation and transferred 
out to another installation, the CO 2 may be subtracted from the originating installation’s 
emissions (Annex III, B.8.2) provided  that both of the following qualifying criteria and 
conditions are me t:  
• The originating and receiving installations must both either be CBAM 
participants or in an ‘ eligible MRV system’ (see section 6.5.3) . 
• Receiving  installations are for the purpose of CO 2 capture:  
o For storage or transport for long- term geological storage; or  
o To use CO 2 to produce products where the CO 2 used is permanently 
chemically bound90. Which products are eligible will be defined in an 
implementing act under the EU ETS Directive (Article 12(3b)) which will 
also apply for the purpose of the CBAM.  
In all other cases, the CO 2 transferred out of the installation is to be accounted for in the 
emissions of the originating installation.  
Note that criteria of the last bullet point (CO 2 being chemically permanently bound) 
applies also to situation where the CO 2 is used for this purpose within the same 
installation. Currently no production process covered by the CBAM has been 
identified in the relevant legislation to allow considering CO 2 to be considered 
chemically permanently bound91. 
 
6.5.6.3 Monitoring requirements  
Regarding the monitoring of inherent CO 2, the same monitoring approach as for the 
transfer of waste gases above is applicable. To monitor the quantity of CO 2 transferred 
from one installation to another, a measurement -based methodology should be used. The 
receiving and/or the tr ansferring installation should monitor the incoming CO 2 stream 
using a CEMS, and share and align the quantity transferred to ensure this is reported 
 
90  The Implementing Regulation is aligned here with the applicable EU ETS legislation, which requires as 
a criterion for counting CO 2 as not emitted that it is used to “ produce products in which the carbon 
stemming from CO 2 is permanently chemically bound so that it does not enter the atmosphere under 
normal use, including any normal activity taking place after the end of the life of the product ”. At the 
time of writing this guidance (summer 2023), EU ETS legislation was under development to define 
which products or production processes are eligible.  
91  In particular CO 2 bound in the production process of urea is not eligible , as permanence is not given in 
urea’s main use, as a fertilizer .  
130 consistently between both installations. This continuous monitoring can be omitted if the 
complete CO 2 mass  stream of the installation, or of a clearly identifiable part thereof, are 
transferred. In such case the CO 2 quantity can be calculated from the input source streams 
of that installation.  
For the amount of CO 2 permanently chemically bound in products, a c alculation -based 
methodology should be used, preferably using a mass balance. The chemical reactions applied, and all relevant stoichiometric factors should be set out in the monitoring methodology documentation. 
 6.6 Determine installation’s indirect emission s 
For the purpose of the transitional period of the CBAM, indirect embedded emissions 
have to be reported separately from the direct embedded emissions , for all goods 
covered .  
Indirect emissions of an installation or of a production process are equivalent to  the 
emissions caused by the production of the electricity consumed in the  installation or  
production process  of goods , respectively, multiplied with the applicable emission factor 
for electric ity: 
 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚
𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖𝑝𝑝𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷= 𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒=𝐴𝐴𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒∙𝐴𝐴𝐹𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒 
Where:  
𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖𝑝𝑝𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷 are the indirect attributed emissions of a production process  expressed in t 
CO 2; 
𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒 are the emissions related to electricity produced or consumed, expressed in t CO 2;  
𝐴𝐴𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒 is the electricity consumed expressed in MWh or TJ ; and 
𝐴𝐴𝐹𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒 is the emission factor for electricity applied, expressed in t  CO 2/MWh or t  CO 2/TJ. 
The general rule for the emission factor is that the operator shall use a default value provided by the European Commission for that purpose. However, Annex IV section 6 defines conditions under which the operator may use actual data for the emission factor:   
• If there is a direct technical link between the installation in which the imported 
good is produced and the electricity generation source ; or  
• If the operator of that installation has concluded a power purchase agreement with 
a producer of electricity  located in a third country for an amount of electricity that 
is equivalent to the amount for which the use of a specific [emission factor] value 
is claimed.  
Therefore, if you generate electricity within your own installation, you should use the 
emission f actor which you determine using the rules discussed in section 6.7.3. If you 
receive electricity from a directly technically connected installation (e.g. a CHP unit  at 
131 your installation’s site92) and if that installation uses the same monitoring approaches as 
outlined in the CBAM Implementing Regulation, you should use the emission factor 
provided by that installation’s operator. Furthermore, if your installation has a power 
purchase agreement93 with an installation more remote, again the emission factor provided 
by that electricity supplier should be used. In all other case s, i.e. for electricity received 
from the grid, the default emission factor for electricity in the country or region as provided by the European Commission shall be used. Those default values are based on data by the IEA and made accessible through the Com mission’s CBAM Transitional 
Registry . 
 
6.7 Rules required for attributing emissions to production processes  
Section 6.2.2 describes the approach to att ributing emissions from the installation level to 
production processes, and section 6.2.2.2 gives the formula for the related calculation. 
From there it is apparent that for determining attributed emissions of a production process, 
further parameters beyond the installation’s emissions need to be determined. These are the topic of this section, which is structured as follows:  
• Some generic rules for attribution parameters to production processes are explained in section 6.7.1. This applies e .g. to splitting source stream data or 
attributing heat flows, etc.;  
• Monitoring rules for flows of heat are discussed in section 6.7.2;  
• Electricity monitoring rules are the subject of section 6.7.3;  
• Heat and electricity can be produced by ‘cogeneration’ (CHP), i.e. in a single process. The related joint calculation rules are discussed in section 6.7.4.  
• Rules for waste gases are provided in section 6.7.5 . 
Thereafter, section 6.8 deals with the parameters needed to calculate embedded emissions of goods based on the attributed emissions of the production process, as outlined in 
section 6.2.2.3, providing guidance on how to determine activity levels of the production 
process (i.e. the amount of goods produced, section 6.8.1, and data on precursors, section  
6.8.2).  
 
6.7.1 Generic r ules for metering of parameters to be attributed to production 
processes  
Section F.3.1 of Annex III to  the Implementing Regulation provides generic rules for how 
to attribute various data sets (source streams, heat, electricity, waste gases) to production 
processes, as follows:  
 
92  It is a frequently found situat ion that a central heat and/or electricity supply serves several installations 
at the same site. Usually there is a close link also in the company structure, or clear contractual relations 
between operators at the site, so that the conditions of a “power purchase agreement” can be considered 
fulfilled.  
93  Annex IV to the CBAM Regulation defines: ‘power purchase agreement’ means a contract under which 
a person agrees to purchase electricity directly from an electricity producer;  
132 • Where data for a specific data set are not availab le for each production process, 
an appropriate method for determining the required data for each individual 
production process shall be chosen. For this purpose, either of the following principles shall be applied depending on which principle yields more a ccurate 
results:  
o Where over time, different goods are produced one after the other in the 
same production line, inputs, outputs, and corresponding emissions shall be attributed sequentially to relevant goods/production processes based on the usage time per year for each;  
o Where products are produced in parallel at the same time or in the same 
production process, inputs, outputs, and corresponding emissions shall be attributed based on a suitable correlating parameter, such as : 
 The mass or volume of individual goods produced;  or  
 Estimates based on the ratio of free reaction enthalpies of the 
chemical reactions involved ; or  
 Based on another suitable distribution key that is corroborated by a 
sound scientific methodology. 
Note in particular that for production of hydrogen using electrolysis, the Implementing 
Regulation gives concrete formulae for attributing emissions to the different products based on molar ratios (see section 7.5.1.2).  
Another issue is how to correlate different measurements at installation level and at the level of production processes (or specific physical units of the installation, such as 
individual boilers, furnaces, etc.). The following text box and Figure 6-5  give guidance 
on these issues. 
 
Text taken from  Commission’s EU ETS Guidance document No.5 (see footnote 85) with 
CBAM -related changes . 
One of the most common situations at installations is that a fuel is used in several 
physical units of the installation. This situation is chosen for its simplicity here to 
illustrate the basic principles of splitting data into production processes . However, 
similar approaches apply to all kinds of materials and e nergy flows, e.g. the attribution 
of heat or electricity consumption to production processes .  
In the example fuel (e.g. natural gas) consumption is determined using continual 
metering. In installations there is often one central measurement (a main gas me ter) 
where the gas is entering the installation, and further sub- meters at individual process 
units. The quality of the meters may differ. The main meter is the one of highest 
importance for economic reasons, and both the operator and the gas supplier are 
interested in accurate measurement results. In many countries  such meters are therefore 
subject to National Legal Metrological Control (NLMC). But also,  where this is not the 
case, the owner of the instrument (often the gas supplier or grid operator) will ensure 
regular maintenance and calibration of the instrument (including the instruments for temperature and pressure compensation). For cost reasons the sub -meters are often of 
lower accuracy (higher uncertainty). Furthermore, there may be some units which  have 
133 no separate meters, or the locations of the meters may not coincide with the boundaries 
of the sub- installations.  
The example (see Figure 6-5Figure 6-5: ) deals with a fictitious installation where 
natural gas is used in three physical units serving two production processes . Units 1 and 
2 belong to production process  1, and unit 3 belongs to production process 2. The figure 
shows different situations that can be found in typical installations:  
• Case 1: In this simple, cost -effective situation the total amount of gas is 
metered by the measuring instrument MI total. This instrument is also used in 
MMD . The second measuring instrument (MI -1) relates directly to production 
process  1. Its results should be used for CBAM  purposes. The gas quantity for 
production process 2 is simply calculated as difference between the readings of 
MItotal and MI -1. 
• Case 2: This is another simple case with two meters for two production 
processes. As there is no meter for the total gas entering the installation, it is to be assumed that the operator determine s the gas consumption for calculating 
the installation -level emiss ions as sum of the readings of those two meters.  
• Case 3: Although here two meters are found, they are located in a way that they cannot be used for determining the production process -level gas consumption. 
The operator will have to establish a situation more like that in case 1, i.e. the operator should install a sub- meter either at a position like MI -1 or like MI -2 in 
case 2, and then continue as under case 1.  
• Case 4: In this case the gas consumption is “over -determined”, i.e. there are 
more measuring instruments than required. In such situation it is often observed that the sum of the sub- meters’ readings (MI -1a, MI -1b and MI -2) differs from 
the reading of the main meter MI
total. As explained above, it is usually assumed 
that the result of MI total is the  most reliable one, i.e. it represents most accurate 
available data. Therefore, the production process es’ data must be adjusted such 
that their sum is identical to the installation -level data. This is achieved by 
applying a  “reconciliation factor” (see bel ow). The readings of the sub- meters 
are thereafter corrected by multiplying them with that reconciliation factor.  
Note: Case 4 assumes that clearly MI total is the best instrument, and the others are of 
lower quality. This is not always the case. It might a s well be that e.g. MI -2 is of 
considerably higher quality than the other two sub- meters. In this case it would be 
justified to use the method described in case 1 instead. The instruments MI -1a and MI -
1b would then be used only as corroborating data source .  
 
The calculation for case 4 above is given by the Implementing Regulation as follows:  
RecF  = DInst /Σ DPP  
Where:  
RecF … is the reconciliation factor  
DInst… is the data value determined for the installation as a whole  
DPP… are the data values for the different production processes  
134 The data for each production process are then corrected as follows, with D PP,corr  being the 
corrected value of D PP: 
DPP,corr  = D PP × RecF  
 
Figure 6-5: Generic cases explaining basic concepts for splitting data to production 
processes. “Sub- Inst.” should be read as “production process” (i.e. part of an 
installation). Please see main text for more information.  
Generic cases of metering issues  
 
Source: European Commission/Umweltbundesamt94   
  
6.7.2 Rules for heat energy and emissions  
This section discusses the quantif ication  of net measurable heat  flows  and the calculation 
of heat emissions factors.  Heat is a relevant parameter for attributed emissions of a 
production process where either heat is received from another installation, another 
production process or from a central heat supply serving more than one production process, or where heat is exported from the process to other production processes within the installation, or to other installations. ‘Other installations’ here includes also district heating networks. 
 
94  Commission’s EU ETS Guidance document No.5 (see footnote 85).  Unit 1
Unit 2
Unit 3Sub-inst 1
Fuel
Sub-Inst 2Installation boundaries
MItotalMI-1Case 3Unit 1
Unit 2
Unit 3Sub-inst 1
Fuel
Sub-Inst 2Installation boundaries
MItotal MI-1
Calc. 2Case 1
Unit 1
Unit 2
Unit 3Sub-inst 1
Fuel
Sub-Inst 2Installation boundaries
MI-1
MI-2Calc. totalCase 2
Unit 1
Unit 2
Unit 3Sub-inst 1
Fuel
Sub-Inst 2Installation boundaries
MItotal MI-1b
MI-2MI-1aCase 4

135 The treatment of waste gases, combined he at and power (CHP) and biomass energy and 
emissions are discussed separately as special cases  in the following sections . 
 
6.7.2.1 Quantification of net heat flows  
Where measurable heat95 is produced in, consumed by, imported into, or exported from 
the production process , the net quantity of measurable heat flows and emissions associated 
with the production of that heat should be monitored and attributed,  in line with the 
methods laid out in Part C, Annex III to the Implementing Regulation .  
Measurable heat has the following characteristics:  
• All measurable heat is to be understood as ‘ net measurable heat’ , i.e. the amount 
of heat (enthalpy) consumed by a production process96 is determined by 
subtracting the heat content entering a process or external user (as forward flow) 
and the heat content returning from that process (as return flow);  
• The heat flows (forward and return) are transported using a heat transfer medium, 
which is typically h ot water or steam, but may also be heated oil, hot air etc .; 
• The heat flows are transported through pipework or ducts (for hot air); and  
• The heat flows are or could be measured by a heat meter97. 
In determining the net quantity of measurable heat consumed by a production process, 
considerations that may apply include:  
• Whether there are imports or exports of measurable heat (cross -boundary heat 
flows) – the amount of heat imported or exported should be quantified, as the emissions associated with th e production of that heat should be monitored.  
• The number of production processes consuming the same heat transfer medium – 
the quantity of heat consumed by each heat consuming process should be 
determined separately, unless these fo rm part of the same ove rall production 
process of the same good. 
• The quantity of heat consumed in the operation of the installation’s heat distribution network
98, as well as heat losses, should be taken into account.  
Therefore, a precise monitoring of the net quantity of measura ble heat requires 
measurement  of the following parameters:  
• Flow rate of the heat transfer medium (volumetric or mass flow) to the process.  
 
95  ‘Measurable heat’ means a net heat flow transported through identifiable pipelines or ducts using a heat 
transfer medium, such as, in particular, steam, hot air, water, oil, liquid metals and salts, for which a heat 
meter is or could be installed. ‘Non- measurable heat’ means all heat other than measurable heat.  
96  The heat consumer can be a production process within the inst allation or outside the installation. Also 
where heat is used to provide cooling via an absorption chiller, that cooling process is also considered to be a heat consuming process.  
97  ‘Heat meter’ means a thermal energy meter or any other device to measure and record the amount of 
thermal energy produced based upon flow volumes and temperatures.  
98  Equipment deaerators, make -up water preparation, boiler blow -off or blow -down systems, including any 
heat losses in the heat distribution pipework.  
136 • State of the  heat transfer  medium entering the heat consuming process, where 
“state” includes all parameters relevant for determining the specific enthalpy of 
the medium:  
o Temperature;  
o Pressure (in case of steam or other gases);  
o Type of the medium (hot water, steam, heated oil etc.);  
o In the case of steam information on saturation or degree of super -heating; 
etc. 
• State of the heat transfer medium leaving the heat consuming process;  
• If the flow rate of the returned heat transfer medium  (condensate in case of steam)  
is different from the forward flow, or if unknown, suitable assumptions for its 
enthalpy are required.  
Based on the measured values, you, as the operator , determine the enthalpy and the specific 
volume of the heat transfer medium using suitable steam tables or engineering software.  
Such determination is a difficult task, in particular because industrial in stallations may 
have complex heat networks with several heat sources and a multitude of consumers. Therefore, the Implementing Regulation Annex III Part C.1.2 provides several different 
methods that may be used to determine the net quantity of measurable heat, depending on what data sources are available.  
6.7.2.2 Monitoring requirements  
For monitoring, you, as the operator,  should establish processes for di rect, and where 
necessary indirect , measurement of heat flows, using your  own measurement system. 
These procedures should be established, docum ented in your montioring methodology 
documentation, implemented , and maintained through written procedures. These should 
include the regular checking and review of heat flows in the installation to confirm: 
• Any additions or removals of heat consuming units in the installation or 
production process.  
• Any changes in the types of heat flows in the installation i.e. heat imports, 
production, consumption or exports.  
• Any resulting modifications that may be required to the monitoring methodology, if relevant.  
 
Methodologies for determining net measurable heat  
Where a production process consumes measurable heat produced within the installation, 
you, as the operator , may use one of the following methods to determine the net quantity 
of measurable heat produced and corresponding emissions . Methods 1 to 3 relate to 
decreasing data quality and monitoring effort. Therefore method 1 is preferred over method 
2, which is preferred over method 3 (see section 6.4.4 on selecting best available data 
sources) : 
 
137 Method 1: Using measurements  
In this method, all relevant parameters listed above are measured  or otherwise known. In 
case steam condensate is not returned or its flow is unknown, a reference temperature of 
90°C is to be used99. The mass flow rate and heat flow rate of the medium are calculated 
as below:  
𝑚𝑚̇=𝑉𝑉̇/𝑣𝑣 
𝑄𝑄̇=�ℎ𝑓𝑓𝑐𝑐𝐷𝐷𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑒𝐷𝐷𝑝𝑝−ℎ𝐷𝐷𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑜𝑜𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖�∙𝑚𝑚̇ 
Where:  
𝑚𝑚̇…is the mass flow rate in kg/s  
𝑉𝑉̇…is the v olumetric flow rate in m3/s 
𝑣𝑣… is the specific volume in m3/kg 
𝑄𝑄̇…is the heat flow rate in kJ/s  
hforward … is the enthalpy of the transmitted forward flow in kJ/kg  
hreturn…is the enthalpy of the return flow in kJ/kg  
Where the mass flow rate is assumed to be the same for the transmitted and returned heat transfer medium, the heat flow rate is calculated using the difference in enthalpy between the transmitted flow and the return flow.  
If the mass flow rates are known to be different, the following consideration should apply, if it is confirmed that: 
• Some condensate remains in the product, the respective amount of condensate enthalpy is not deducted.  
• Some condensate is lost (leaks or sewerage), the respective amount of condensate is estimated and d educted from the mass flow of the heat transfer medium . 
The net annual heat flow can be determined from the above data, by either of the following 
methods:  
• Determine annual average values for the parameters determining the annual average enthalpy of the tr ansmitted and returned heat medium, and multiply with 
the total annual mass flow; 
• Determine hourly values of the heat flow and sum up those values over the annual total operating time of the heat system. Subject to the data processing system, hourly values  may be substituted by other time intervals as appropriate.  
 
Method 2:  Calculation of a proxy based on measured efficiency  
This method builds on the energy input of all fuels and determines the amount of net 
measurable heat based on the known efficiency of  the boiler, using the following equations:  
 
99  Even if not all condensate is returned to the supply, net measurable heat should be calculated assuming  
100% return of the condensate.  
138 𝑄𝑄=𝜂𝜂𝐻𝐻∙𝐴𝐴𝐼𝐼𝑖𝑖 
𝐴𝐴𝐼𝐼𝑖𝑖=�𝐴𝐴𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷∙𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑉𝑉𝐷𝐷
𝐷𝐷 
Where:  
Q…is the net amount of heat [TJ] produced over the reporting period  
𝜂𝜂𝐻𝐻…is the measured efficiency of heat production  
EIn…is the energy input [TJ] from fuels  determined using the second  equation over the 
reporting period  
AD i…Annual activity data (i.e. quantities consumed) of fuels  i [tonnes or Nm3] 
NCV i…Net calorific value [TJ/t or TJ/Nm3] of fuels  i 
This method refers to the ‘measured efficiency’ of heat production because you, as the 
operator, are  advised to measure it ‘over a reasonably long period’ of time, in order to take 
into account different load states of the installation.  
Alternatively, the efficiency of heat production can be taken from the boiler manufacturer’s 
documentation (which is the less preferred approach, considering the generic hierarchy of approaches). In this case, the specific part load curve should be taken i nto account by using 
an annual load factor, calculated as follows:  
𝐿𝐿
𝐹𝐹=𝐴𝐴𝐼𝐼𝑖𝑖
𝐴𝐴𝐼𝐼𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒 
Where:  
LF…is the load factor  
EIn…is the energy input [TJ] from fuels  determined over the reporting period 
EMax…is the maximum fuel input if the heat producing unit had been running at 100 % 
nominal load for the full calendar year  
In the case of a steam raising boiler the efficiency should be based on a situation in which all condensate is returned. A temperature of 90  °C should be assumed for the returned 
condensate , if no actual values are available.  
 
Method 3: Calculating a proxy based on the reference efficiency   
This approach is meant for situations where boiler efficiencies are not known. This Method 
is the same as Method 2 but uses a reference efficiency of 70 % as a conservative 
assumption ( η
Ref,H = 0,7).  
 
Specific requirements for cross -boundary heat flows  
In the case of cross -boundary heat flows (imports and exports) of measurable heat, you, as 
the operator, should where possible determine the quantity of these heat flows using your  
own measuring system, ensuring that the monitoring approach covers the foll owing:  
139 • The quantity of heat imported, where applicable separately for each source,  and 
record its origin.  
• Obtain ed data from the supplier of the imported heat for determining 
emissions100, for the most recent available reporting period. 
• The quantity of hea t exported , if applicable . 
 
 Heat energy balance  
In practical terms, where an installation has complex heat flows i.e. it imports, exports or 
transfers measurable heat between different production processes on the same installation, the precise split between the different heat production and consumption processes may be 
determined using a heat energy balance, which is used to:  
• Determine the precise split for the annual quantities of all flows of measurable 
heat into and out of the production process.  
• Attribute the corresponding fuel input emissions to the  production processes, in 
proportion to the heat split
101. Where heat losses are not attributed to specific 
production processes, they shall be attributed proportionally to the split of consumed heat.  
• Corroborate overall consumption and corresponding emissions. 
 Methodologies for determining fuel emission factors for measurable heat  
Where measurable heat is consumed within a production process or exported from it , the 
heat related emissions  are determined by one of the following approache s: 
• Approach 1 – used for heat produced in the installation by ways other than CHP;  
• Approach 2 – used for heat produced in the installation by CHP;   
• Approach 3 – heat was produced outside of the installation. 
 
Approach 1 – Emission factor of non -CHP measurable heat produced in the installation 
 
100  In principle the emission factor of the fuel mix used by the heat supplier is required.  
101  The CBAM Implementing Regulation  Annex III Section F.4: “ Where emissions from source streams or 
emission sources cannot be attributed in accordance with other approaches, they should be attributed 
using correlated parameters, which have already been attributed to production process es in accordance 
with Section F.3.1 of this Annex. For that purpose, source stream amounts and their respective emissions 
are attributed proportionally to the ratio in which those parameters are attributed to production 
processes. Appropriate parameters include the mass of goods produced, mass or volume of fuel or 
material consumed, amount of non- measurable heat produced, operating hours, or known equipment 
efficiencies .” 
140 For non -CHP measurable heat produced from the combustion of fuels within the 
installation, the emission factor of the relevant fuel mix is determined and the emissions 
attributable to the production process are calculated as:  
Em Heat = EF mix · Q consumed  / η 
Where:  
Em Heat…is the heat -related emissions of the production process in tCO 2 
EFmix…is the emission factor of the respective fuel mix expressed as t  CO 2/TJ including 
emissions from flue gas cleaning, where applicable   
Qconsume d…is the amount of measurable heat consumed in the production process in TJ  
η … is the efficiency of the heat production process  
 
EFmix is separately  calculated using the following equation:  
 
EFmix = (Σ AD i · NCV i · EF i + Em FGC) / (Σ AD i · NCV i) 
Where:  
AD i…is the annual activity data (i.e. quantities consumed) of fuels  i [tonnes or Nm3] used 
for measurable heat production NCV
i…is the net calorific value [TJ/t or TJ/Nm3] of fuels  i 
EFi …is the emission factors of fuels i  expressed in t  CO 2/TJ. 
Em FGC …are process emissions from flue gas cleaning expressed in t  CO 2.  
These parameters are readily available if the calculation -based approach is used for 
monitoring of direct emissions (see section 6.5.1).  
Where a was te gas  (for definition see section 6.7.5)  is part of the fuel mix used, and 
where the emission factor of the waste gas is higher than the standard emission factor of 
natural gas, that standard emission factor is used to calculate EF mix instead of the 
emission factor of the waste gas . 
 
Approach 2  – heat produced in the installation by CHP  
The emissions of the total fuel input to the CHP unit are split in accordance with the method 
described in section 6.7.4 to give emissions for heat and emissions for electricity.  
Approach 3  – Emission factor of measurable heat imports, produced outside of the 
installation  
When a production process consumes imported measurable heat that is provided by a third-
party supplier outside  of the installation or production process, the emissions associated 
with the production of that heat are requested from the heat supplier ; and are to be 
determined by that supplier using either Approach 1 or Approach 2, as applicable , using 
the data of the latest available reporting period. If the supplier is subject to an eligible MRV 
system such data should be available; if not , you as the operator of the heat consuming 
installation , should ensure the heat delivery contract with the third -party supplier covers 
this requirement.  
141 If actual emissions data is not available from the heat supplier , then a standard value 
emission factor should be used, for the fuel most commonly used in the relevant country 
and industrial sector, and assuming a boiler effi ciency of 90%.  
 
Exceptions  
In quantifying net measurable heat, no distinction is made between its different origins, 
provided it is in scope for the CBAM. However, there are a number of exceptions to this 
rule ( Implementing Regulation, Annex III, Section C .1.3):  
• Heat produced from exothermic chemical processes (not combustion)  – 
where a production process consumes measurable heat produced from an exothermic chemical process e.g. nitric acid or ammonia production, you should:  
o Determine the amount of measurable heat consumed separately from other measurable heat; and  
o Assign zero CO
2 emissions to that heat consumption. 
• Heat recovered from electricity -driven processes – you should:  
o Determine the amount of measurable heat consumed  that has been 
recovered from the electricity driven process, such as heat recovered from air compressors and used for supplying hot process water  (separately from 
other measurable heat ); and  
o Assign zero CO
2 emissions to that heat consumption. 
• Heat recovered from ‘non -measurable heat’102 – to avoid double counting 
where a production process consumes measurable heat that has been recovered 
from non- measurable heat generated from fuels e.g. where heat is recovered from 
kiln exhaust gases, you should:  
o Determine the amount of measurable heat consumed, that has been 
recovered from the kiln exhaust gases (separately f rom other measurable 
heat); and  
o Divide this amount of heat by a reference efficiency of 90% to determine 
the equivalent energy input for the measurable heat  recovered;  this energy 
input is then subtracted from the fuel input into the kiln for the non-
measurable heat.  
 
6.7.3 Rules for electrical energy and its emissions  
The following section covers the quantification of electricity produced within the 
installation  or consumed for the production of  goods , the calculation of emissions factors 
of electricity  used for  the attribution of emissions to production processes  (see section 
6.2.2.2 for h ow produced electricity is relevant in the calculation of direct attributed 
emissions, and section 6.6 for consumed electricity and attributed indir ect emissions) . 
 
102  Non-measurable heat means all heat other than measurable heat. Quantities of non -measurable heat are 
determined by the relevant quantities of fuels used for producing the heat, and the net calorific value 
(NCV) of the fuel mix  
142 The treatment of CHP electrical energy and its related emissions are discussed separately 
in section 6.7.4. 
 
6.7.3.1 Quantification of electricity amounts  
In order to determine the quantity of electricity consumed or produced by a production 
process, electricity supplies should be metered. Metering should apply to real power, not 
apparent power (complex power) , i.e. only the active power component consumed by the 
installation should be metered, and the reactive power (or return) component should be disregarded.  
As only the consumption by the installation is being considered, any transmission and distribution losses for im ported electricity before the installation boundary, i.e. between 
the grid supply point and the installation boundary, should be disregarded.  
6.7.3.2 Monitoring requirements  
For monitoring, you, as the operator, should establish processes for direct and where necessary indirect measurement of electricity consumed, using your  own measurement 
system. For choosing best available data sources see section 6.4.4.  
Emission factor for self -supplied electricit y or for electricity provided through a 
direct technical connection  
For electricity produced within the installation by separate (i.e. non -CHP) 
production, t he emission factor of electricity EF
El is calculated  using the specific fuel mix 
using the following equation:  
EFEl = ((Σ AD i · NCV i · EF i + Em FGC )) / El prod 
Where:  
AD i are the annual activity data (i.e ., quantities consumed) of fuels i  used for the electricity 
production expressed in tonnes or Nm3,  
NCV i is the net calorific values of fuels i  expressed in TJ/t or TJ/Nm3,  
EFi is the emission factors of fuels i  expressed in t  CO 2/TJ, 
Em FGC are proces s emissions from flue gas cleaning expressed in t  CO 2,  
Elprod is the net amount of electricity produced expressed in MWh. It may include quantities 
of electricity produced from other sources than by combustion of fuels. 
These parameters are readily available if the calculation -based approach is used for 
monitoring of direct emissions (see section 6.5.1).  
Where a waste gas  (for definition see section 6.7.5 ) is part of the fuel mix used, the standard 
emission factor for natural gas  given in Implementing Regulation Anne x VIII should be 
used to calculate EF El instead of the emission factor of the waste gas (unless the EF for the 
waste gas is lower).  
In the case of electricity produced within the installation through CHP , the emissions 
of the total fuel input to the CHP unit are split in accordance with the method described in 
143 section 6.7.4 to give emissions for heat and emissions for electricity. From there, the 
emission factor for electricity can be calculated.  
If the electricity is not produced by the installation itself, but provided by a ‘directly 
connected’ installation103 –, the electricity emission factor is determined as above (i.e. 
using the same approaches as if the electricity were produced in the installation ), but data 
must be made available by the electricity supplier).  
Emission factor for electricity received fro m the grid:  
• The default approach is to use a default factor  provided by the Commission in 
the CBAM Transitional Registry, which is an average emission factor of the 
country of origin’s electricity grid, based on data from the International Energy 
Agency (I EA).  
• If you as the operator find it more appropriate, you may use any other emission 
factor of the country of origin’s electricity grid based on publicly available data 
representing either the average emission factor104 or the CO 2 emission factor105. 
• Actual emission factors may be used in the case of power purchase agreements , provided that the emission factor is determined as described above . 
The determination of specific emission factors by using m arket -based instruments such as 
“guarantees of origin” or “green certificates” for renewable energy sources etc. is not 
allowed.  
 
6.7.4 Rules for combined heat and power  
Combined heat and power (CHP), also referred to as ‘cogeneration’, is the simultaneous 
generation of heat and power in a single integrated process.  
The heat produced from CHP is recovered for a useful heat consuming purpose
106 in the 
form of hot water, steam or hot air, whilst the power output is usually electricity (may be mechanical power). As this is a single combined proc ess, the split of emissions between 
heat and power must be calculated using certain assumptions and formulae, to allocate 
emissions to each output.  
The following text box gives the references to the relevant annex sections. 
 
103 An installation can be assumed to be directly connected if it is located at the same site, or has the same 
operator, and in particular if it has a direct electricity transmission line to the installation producing the 
goods under the CBAM.  
104  The CBAM Regulation defines: ‘Emission factor for electricity’ means the default value, expressed in CO
2e, representing the  emission intensity of electricity consumed in production of goods . 
105  The CBAM Regulation defines: ‘ CO 2 emission factor’, means the weighted average of the CO 2 intensity 
of electricity produced from fossil fuels within a geographic area. The CO 2 emission factor is the result 
of the division of the CO 2 emission data of the electricity sector by the gross electricity generation based 
on fossil fuels in the relevant geographic area. It is expressed in tonnes of CO 2 per megawatt -hour.  
106  Where heat is used to provide cooling via an absorption cooling process, that cooling process is considered as the heat consuming process.  
144 Implementing Regulation referen ces:  
Annex III, Section C Heat flows, C.1 Rules for determining net measurable heat and C.2.2 Emission 
factor of measurable heat produced in the installation by cogeneration.  
Annex III, Section D Electricity, D.3 Rules for determining electricity quantit ies and D.4.2 Emission 
factor of electricity produced in the installation by cogeneration.  
Annex IX, Efficiency reference values for separate production of electricity and heat, Tables 1 and 2.  
 
The Implementing Regulation provides a n approach for attributing CHP -related emissions 
to production processes, which is based on calculating specific emission factors for CHP 
heat and power107 outputs. This approach is outlined below, alongside the i nformation 
required for these calculations.  
 
Information required to attribute CHP emissions to production processes  
In order to calculate the split in emissions between heat and power outputs from CHP, you 
need to collect the following information, as relevant: 
(a) Total amount of fuel input into CHP in the reporting period:  
𝐴𝐴𝐼𝐼𝑖𝑖=∑𝐴𝐴𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷∙𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑉𝑉𝐷𝐷 𝐷𝐷   
Wh
ere:  
EIn…is the energy input from fuels 
AD i…Activity data (i.e. quantities consumed) of fuels i  [tonnes or Nm3] 
NCV i…Net calorific value [TJ/t or TJ/Nm3] of fuels  i 
These parameters are readily available if the calculation -based approach is used for 
monitoring of direct emissions (see section 6.5.1).  
 
(b) Heat produced from CHP : the activity level here is the net amount of measurable heat 
Qnet produced by CHP in TJ during the reporting period. Rules for determining heat flows 
are given in section 6.7.2. 
(c) Electricity produced from CHP : The activity level here is the net amount of electricity 
(or mechanical energy, where applicable) in TJ, produced by the CHP during the reporting period. T he net amount of electricity means the amount of electricity exported (leaving the 
system boundaries) of the CHP unit, after subtraction of internally consumed electricity (‘parasitic load’).  
(d) T
otal emissions from CHP: which comprise the emissions from fuel input to CHP, as 
well as the amount of emissions from flue gas cleaning, in tonnes of CO 2 per year. The 
total amount of emissions in t CO 2 is calculated using the following equation. 
 
107  The rules regarding electricity apply also to the production of mechanical energy, if relevant.  
145 𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝑁𝑁𝐻𝐻𝑃𝑃 =  ∑𝐴𝐴𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷∙𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑉𝑉𝐷𝐷∙𝐴𝐴𝐹𝐹𝐷𝐷+𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝐹𝐹𝑊𝑊𝑁𝑁 𝐷𝐷   
Wh
ere:  
Em CHP…is the emissions from CHP in the reporting period [t CO 2] 
Em FGC… process emissions from flue gas cleaning [t CO 2] 
AD i, NCV i  and EF i have the same meaning as above under (a)  
 
(e) Average efficiencies for heat and electricity over the reporting period:  these 
dimensionless values are calculated from inputs (a) to (c) above, according to the following 
equations. H owever, if inputs (a) to (c) are not available , use instead the efficiencies 
presented under (f). 
𝜂𝜂ℎ𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒=𝑄𝑄𝐼𝐼𝑛𝑛𝐼𝐼
𝐸𝐸𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼    and    𝜂𝜂 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒=𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑙𝑙
𝐸𝐸𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼  
Where:  
ηheat…is the average heat efficiency during the reporting period  
Qnet…is the net amount of heat [TJ] produced during the reporting period  
EIn…is the energy input [TJ] calculated from (a) above 
ηel…is the average electrical efficiency during the reporting period  
Eel… is the net amount of electricity [TJ] produced during the reporting period, from (c) 
above 
 
(f) Design or standard efficiencies : if it is not technically feasible for you, as the operator, 
to separately determine the efficiencies of heat and electricity, or this would incur 
unreasonable cost, then values based on the manufacturer’s technical documentation  
(i.e. the design values ) should be used. If these are also not available, then conservative  
standard efficiency values of 55% for heat  and 25% for electricity  may be used in the 
following calculations. 
 
(g) Reference efficiencies : are used in the calculation of the attribution factors for 
emissions. The reference efficiency values used are for h eat production in a stand- alone 
boiler, and for electricity production without cogeneration. You, as the operator, should 
select the appropriate fuel -specific electricity and heat reference efficiency value from 
Tables 1 and 2 in Annex IX of the Implementing Regulation. Those factors are also 
included in Annex E  of this guidance document. 
 
(h) The attribution factors for heat and electricity  are then calculated as follows.  
𝐹𝐹𝑁𝑁𝐻𝐻𝑃𝑃 ,𝐻𝐻𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒=ɳℎ𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒ɳ𝐷𝐷𝑒𝑒𝑓𝑓 ,ℎ𝑒𝑒 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒⁄
ɳℎ𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒ɳ𝐷𝐷𝑒𝑒𝑓𝑓 ,ℎ𝑒𝑒 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒⁄ +ɳ𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒ɳ𝐷𝐷𝑒𝑒𝑓𝑓 ,𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒⁄ 
𝐹𝐹𝑁𝑁𝐻𝐻𝑃𝑃 ,𝐸𝐸𝑒𝑒=ɳ𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒ɳ𝐷𝐷𝑒𝑒𝑓𝑓,𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒⁄
ɳℎ𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒ɳ𝐷𝐷𝑒𝑒𝑓𝑓 ,ℎ𝑒𝑒 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒⁄ +ɳ𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒ɳ𝐷𝐷𝑒𝑒𝑓𝑓 ,𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒⁄ 
146 Where:  
FCHP,Heat …is the attribution factor for heat 
FCHP,El … is the attribution factor for electricity (or mechanical energy, if applicable)  
ηref, heat … is the reference efficiency for heat production in a stand -alone boiler   
ηref,el…is the reference efficiency of electricity production without cogeneration  
 
(i) Specific emission factors for CHP -related measurable heat and electricity : The factors 
to be used for the attribution of related (direct and indirect) emissions to production 
processes are calculated as follows:  
EFCHP,Heat  = Em CHP · F CHP,Heat  / Q net 
EFCHP,El  = Em CHP · FCHP,El  / E El,prod 
Where:  
EFCHP, heat …is the emission factor for the production of measurable heat in the CHP unit 
expressed as t  CO 2/TJ 
EFCHP,El …is the emission factor for the production of electricity in the CHP unit expressed 
as t CO 2/TJ 
Qnet…is the net heat produced by the cogeneration unit expressed in TJ  
EEl,prod… is the electricity produced in the CHP unit expressed in TJ 
 
6.7.5 Rules for waste gas energy and emissions 
Waste gases result from  incomplete combustion or chemical reacti ons in certain production 
processes, particularly in the iron and steel sector ; for example, coke oven gas (COG), blast 
furnace gas (BFG) and basic oxygen furnace gas (BOFG), which is also known as 
‘converter gas’.  
These waste gases are a mixture of CO 2 and incompletely oxidised carbon, usually carbon 
monoxide (CO), and sometimes hydrogen (H 2) and further gases , hence they have an 
energy content recoverable through use as a fuel , as well as containing  ‘inherent’ emissions 
arising from the production proc ess. 
The textbox below gives the references to the relevant annex sections.  
Implementing Regulation references:  
Annex II, Production routes for goods, Iron and steel sections 3 .11 to 3.16 
Annex III, Sections B4 requirements for activity data, B5 requirements for calculation factors for CO 2, 
B.8 Requirements for monitoring of CO 2 transfers between installations, F. Rules for attributing 
emissions of an installation to goods.  
Annex VIII, Standard factors used in the monitoring of direct emissions at installation level.  
 
147 The recovery and use of waste gases as a fuel to produce electricity or heat is preferable 
over venting or flaring, as this is energy efficient  and avoids emissions that would 
otherwise be produced through combustion of another fuel to produce this energy.  
The following sections  cover the quantification of energy and the attribution of direct 
emissions from waste gases to production processes. The treatment of flares is also 
discussed below as a special case.  
6.7.5.1 Determining activity  data for waste gases  
According to the definition given in the Implementing Regulation , a waste gas must satisfy 
the following three conditions:  
• Contain incompletely oxidised carbon – usually in the form of CO.  
• Be in a gaseous state under standard conditi ons (note that it is possible that some 
of the organic fractions in the waste gas stream may condense under these conditions).  
• Occur as a result of one of the processes listed in the definition of process emissions, in particular: (a) the chemical, electr olytic or pyrometallurgical 
reduction of metal compounds in ores, concentrates and secondary materials; (b) the removal of impurities from metals and metal compounds; (d) chemical syntheses of products and intermediate products where the carbon bearing material participates in the reaction; (e) the use of carbon containing additives or 
raw materials; (f) the chemical or electrolytic reduction of metalloid oxides or non-metal oxides such as silicon oxides and phosphates. 
Waste gases that are recovered are either used in the production process or installation in 
which they originate, or are  transferred to a different production process or  installation ; for 
example, in integrated steel works, blast furnace gas and converter gas may be used for both upstream processes (e.g. coke making) and downstream processes (e.g. rolling) as well as for electricity production.  
Industrial  processes  do not rely solely on waste gases and must also operate  in stand- alone 
configurations and hence uses waste gas i nterchangeably  with  other fuels e.g.  natural gas.  
In order to determine the volume of waste gas consumed by a production process, waste 
gas supplies should be metered.  
 
6.7.5.2 Monitoring requirements for waste gases and flares  
For waste gases, both the calculatio n factors (NCV , and emission factor or carbon content)  
and volume in normal cubic metres of the respective waste gas should be monitored as set 
out in the Implementation Regulation Annex III , sections B.4 and B.5. The relevant 
requirements are explained in  sections 6.5.1.3 and 6.5.1.4, respectively. Furthermore , the 
rules on selecting best available data sources (section 6.4.4) should be taken into account.  
Flares  
For flares, monitoring should cover both routine and operational flaring (trips, start -up and 
shutdown and emergency relieves) in production processes using waste gas . 
148 When calculating emissions from flare d gases , you should include :  
o Emissions from the combusted flared gas ;  
o Emissions from the combustion of fuels required to operate the flare i.e. pilot 
flame and fuels to combust the flared gas; and 
o Inherent CO 2108 in the flared gas  source stream . 
If accurate monitoring is technically not feasible or would lead to unreasonable costs, a 
reference emission factor of 0,00393 t CO 2/Nm3 should be used109. 
 
6.7.5.3 Attribution of direct emissions  
Waste gases may be fully used within the same produc tion process in which they were 
produced, or they may be  transfe rred across the system boundaries of the production 
process producing the good. For situations where they are not used within the same 
production process, the formulae given in section 6.2.2.2 are used for calculating the 
attrib uted emissions of the production process.  
 
6.8 Calculation of embedded emissions of goods  
Section 6.2.2 describes the approach to attributing emissions  from the installation level to 
production processes, and section 6.2.2.3 gives the formula e for the calculation  of 
embedded emissions of goods from those attribut ed emissions . From there it is apparent 
that for determining embedded  emissions of goods , further parameters need to be 
determined. These are the topic of this section:  
• Rules for monitoring type and quantity of CBAM goods for determining the 
‘activity leve l’ of the production process are explained in section 6.8.1;  
• Guidance on monitoring of data on precursors is offered in section 6.8.2.  
 
6.8.1 Rules for goods  produced 
Following on from section 6.2.2.3 above, you, as the operator, need to determine the 
activity level of each production process, i.e. the quantity of goods produced at your 
installation, for a given reporting period. As explai ned in the section on definitions ( 6.1.1), 
quantities of all goods of the same ‘aggregated goods category’ are summed up to give the 
activity level.  
6.8.1.1 Quantity of goods produced  
The activity level (quantity produced) of a good produced by your installation is calculated 
as the total mass of goods  leaving the production process that meet the product 
 
108 This is CO 2 which is already part of a source stream , see section 6.5.6.1 . 
109  The reference EF used here is d erived from the combustion of pure ethane , and is  used as a conservative 
proxy for flare gas es. 
149 specification for an aggregated CN goods category listed in the CBAM Regulation. This 
may include both final products and precursors used for the production of other goods. 
Avoidance of ‘double counting ’ 
In order to avoid any double counting  of production, only the quantity of final product 
leaving the system boundaries of the production process is counted in the activity level for 
an aggregated  goods category . Only products meeting the required specific ations, i.e. 
saleable products or products being used as precursor within the same installation, are 
taken into account. Hence, the following are excluded from the reported activity level:  
• Product that does not meet the desired quality or specification and is returned to 
the same production process for re -processing.  
• Scrap, by- product or waste materials from the production process, including 
where this is sent to a different installation for re -processing or disposal.  
As a consequence, all attributed emissi ons of the production process are accounted for on 
saleable goods, while scrap and waste have zero embedded emissions, i.e. double counting 
is effectively avoided. From environmental point of view, this incentivises a decrease of material consumption, or t he avoidance of scrap and waste, as a process producing little 
scrap will have lower embedded emissions. 
6.8.1.2 Monitoring requirements  
As an operator, you should first identify all goods produced at your installation, along with 
their applicable CN codes. Proced ures should be put in place to track the list of goods and 
to determine the quantity of goods produced by each production process. These procedures should be documented in the installation’s monitoring methodology documentation. Key 
aspects are discussed b elow.  
Tracking of goods  
A comprehensive list of products ( and precursors ) produced in the installation should be 
established and regularly reviewed, including the following:  
• The product specifications of the listed goods should be reviewed to make sure these match the CN codes given in Annex I to the CBAM Regulation, and Table 
1 section 2 of Annex II to the Implementing Regulation (see section  5 of this 
guidance document).  
• The listed goods are to be correctly attributed to the relevant production routes for 
the production processes of the installation. 
• The list of goods is to be upda ted to include any new goods produced for the first 
time.  The CN code for the new product is to be identified. 
• If the new product belongs to an aggregated goods category previously not found 
in the installation, you as the operator will have to define an a dditional production 
process for separate monitoring of the embedded emissions of that good, except if the ‘bubble approach’ allows you to include the new good in an existing production process (see section 6.3).  
• Any related inputs, outputs and emissions for the new good produced are to be attributed to the relevant production process.  
150 The addition of a new type of good may change the existing attribution of inputs, outputs 
and emissions to existing products and precursors at an installation, and so the review should also take this into account. The written monitoring methodology documentation 
should be updated without undue delay, and the monitoring using the updated methodology is to start immediately.  
Methods to determine the quantity of goods  
In principle, the same methods like for the monitoring of activity data for source streams apply also to the quantification of goods produced. Details are disc ussed in section 6.5.1.3. 
The rules for selecting best available data sources (section 6.4.4) apply.  
Since quantities of produced and sold goods are usually essential elements of a company’s financial report, such data should be available for the CBAM without additional effort. Operators should ensure consistency of their CBAM data with financially audite d reports, 
and use those reports for corroboration of their embedded emissions calculation. 
Monitoring the quality of goods  
Depending on the industry sector and the goods produced, further parameters are to be 
reported by the EU importer in the quarterly CBAM report. Therefore, you as the operator should be able to provide the relevant information to the importer. These additional reporting requirements are listed in section  7 for each sector. Some of these parameters 
require quality information of your products , like for example the clinker content of 
cement, the content of certain alloy elements in steel, the amount of scrap used for the production of steel and aluminium, the concentration of nitric acid or of hydrous ammonia, 
and the content of different nitrogen forms i n mixed fertiliz ers. 
As this is qualitative information, in principle the rules given for calculation factors in section 6.5.1.4 apply. This means t hat – where relevant – laboratory analyses may have to 
be carried out. However, in many cases such analyses will be carried out anyway as part of the production quality control, for ensuring the client’s specifications are met. In some cases it may be more appropriate to calculate the required parameters based on a mass 
balance of process inputs. However, it is assumed that determining the required parameters will be possible without unreasonable effort. The methods used should be contained in the monitorin g methodology documentation, and regularly reviewed.  
Note that the differentiation of goods by their quality makes it necessary to provide data to importers on a more detailed level than just CN codes . For example, if you sell 
three different grades of mix ed fertiliz ers, you will have to provide three separate goods 
with the same CN code with different embedded emissions and composition data in the communication template you make available to EU importers.  
 
6.8.2 Rules for monitoring of precursor data 
In order to  perform the calculation for embedded emissions of complex goods as outlined 
in section  6.2.2.3, the embedded emissions of precursor materials need to be added to the 
direct and indirect emissions attributed to the production process. The following rules 
apply. 
151 • Where relevant precursors are produced within the same installation within the 
same production process using a ‘bubble approach’ (see section 6.3), no separate 
monitoring and calculation is required. Only precursors from other production processes or obtained from other installations need to be  monitored. 
• Where a relevant precursor is produced within the same installation, using a separate production process to the production of the complex good:  
o The quantity of relevant precursor consumed by each of the installation’s complex good production pr ocesses should be determined.  
o The specific direct and indirect  embedded emissions of the precursor need 
to be calculated separately, and should be the average over the reporting period. 
• For relevant precursors  obtained from other installations:  
o The quantit y of precursor consumed and embedded direct and indirect  
emissions should be determined and/or accounted for separately, for each installation from which the relevant precursor is sourced.  
o The precursor specific direct and indirect embedded emissions have  to be 
communicated by the operator of the other installation supplying the precursor . In order to ensure data completeness, precursor producers 
should use the voluntary communication template outlined in section 6.11 
for reporting data on the precursor supplied.  
o However, if these data are inconclusive then default values may be used for calculating the total embedded emissions resulting from the quantity of precursor consumed, but only where the precursors contribute to no more than 20% of total embedded emissions  (see section 6.9) .
  
If precursor materials are obtained from other installations, Section E of Annex III to the Implementing Regulation requires you as the operator produci ng a complex good to 
request the following data from the producer of the precursor material:  
• The country of origin of the imported goods;  
• The installation where it was produced, identified by 
o the unique installation identifier, if available;  
o the applicable United Nations Code for Trade and Transport Location (UN/LOCODE) of the location;  
o an exact address and its English transcript; and 
o the geographical coordinates of the installation.  
• The production route used as defined in Section 3 of Annex II to the 
Implementing Regulation;  
• The values of applicable specific parameters required for determining the 
embedded emissions, as listed in Section 2 of Annex IV to the Implementing Regulation;  
• Specific embedded direct and indirect emissions of the prec ursor as average over 
the most recent available reporting period, expressed in tonnes CO
2e per tonne of 
precursor;  
152 • The start and end date of the reporting period used by the installation from which 
the precursor was obtained;  
• The information on the carbon price due for the precursor, if relevant. 
If the Commission’s communication template is used, it will be automatically ensured that 
these data are complete.  
 
6.9 Use of default factors  and other estimation methods  
Whenever you as an operator do not have all necessary data available for calculation of 
embedded emissions, you need to close those data gaps by the best available data or estimation method. For minor data gaps in your installation’s data (e.g. missing an analysis of one batch of fuel), you should have a suitable estimation method in your monitoring methodology documentation (see section 6.9.3).  
For other situations, there are “ default values ” for the specific direct  and indirect 
emissions of goods and precursors, which you as the operator can use for your purchased 
precursors under certain conditions (see section 6.9.1), and which can also be used by EU declarants for a limited time at the start of the transitional period. Furthermore, default values for electricity emission factors  for calculat ing indirect emissions are made 
available by the Commission (see section  6.9.2).  
 
6.9.1 Default specific embedded emission values  
Default emission factors values have been calculated by the European Commission (for both direct and indirect emissions where appropriate) by CN code. These are provided on the European Commission’s dedicated website for the CBAM and a taxonomy is given in  
sector tables in Annex C  of this document:   
• Default values given at a 4 -digit CN code level apply to all goods falling within 
this 4 -digit CN code category (i.e. independent of the digits followi ng these first 4 
digits) . 
• Default values supplied at a 6- digit CN code level apply to all goods falling 
within this 6 -digit CN code category.  
• Default values supplied at an 8- digit CN code level only apply to this specific 8-
digit CN code good – in most cas e these 8 -digit codes are for the steel industry, 
reflecting the range of different production routes and alloying elements used. 
• In many cases the same default value applies to several CN codes, as listed in Annex C . 
These d efault values can be used as the specific direct or indirect embedded emissions of 
precursor goods that are used as inputs and consumed in the production process for other CBAM goods, where the actual emissions intensities for these precursor goods are not available.  This is usually the case when your precursor supplier does not communic ate the 
relevant data within the required timeframe.  
Article s 4(3) and 5 of the CBAM Implementing Regulation limit  the use of default values : 
153 • Without quantitative limit until 31 July 2024 (i.e. for use in the first three 
quarterly CBAM reports). Thereby, EU importers are allowed to use these values 
to ensure their compliance with the CBAM requirements  in case that they do not 
receive relevant data from operators of installations producing CBAM goods  in 
time. For you as an operator, this allows you to fill data gaps regarding your purchased precursors for data that you communicate to your importers for the same time period.  
• Without time limit, but quantitatively limited: For complex goods, up to 20% of the total embedded emissions may be determined using est imations. Using default 
values provided by the Commission would qualify as ‘estimation’. For you as operator this offers two simplification options for your monitoring:  
o If you produce complex goods and purchase precursors that contribute less than 20% of t he total embedded emissions, you may use the default 
values instead of requesting the supplier to provide the relevant data.  
o If the majority of the embedded emissions of your product are contributed by the precursor s (e.g. if you purchase steel rods for pr oducing screws and 
nuts from them) , you may apply ‘estimations’ to your own production 
process, provided that you receive reliable data on the precursors’ embedded emissions from their producers, and that your own production process contributes not more than 20% to the total embedded emissions. 
In this case, ‘estimation’ for your own emissions may entail using monitoring approaches from other MRV systems, if the methods given in Annex III to the Implementing Regulation are too burdensome for your 
installation.  
Participants wishing to use the  default values determined by the Commission (see Annex 
C) should note that these are set at a relatively high emissions intensity level and, therefore, 
it may be more advantageous to use the actual values for precursor goods where these are 
available.  Furthermore, the default values can serve as a tool for you to check the 
plausibility of your actual data, as  the default values are determined as global average 
values based on publicly available sources.  
 
6.9.2 Default emission factors for grid electricity  
For the rules on the use of default values for the electricity grid’s emission factor for the 
purpose of calcul ating indirect embedded emissions, please see section 6.7.3.2).  
 
6.9.3 Minor data gaps in installation’s monitoring data 
Where data gaps occur in everyday activities of monitoring emissions in the installation, 
the Implementing Regulations requests that substitute data shall consist of conservative 
estimates , i.e. by data that ensures that emissions are not under -estimated, and that activity 
levels (produc tion data) are not over -estimated . The following guidance can be given:  
• If a calculation factor in a calculation -based methodology is missing (e.g. because 
a sample has not been taken in time or no laboratory analysis was made), substitution by a standard value will be simple (see section 6.5.1.4).  
154 • If activity data (section 6.5.1.3) are missing (e.g. because a truck was not 
weighted), it may be a good idea to use the average mass of similar truck loads in 
the same reporting period, adding some supplement (e.g. one standard deviation) to the data to ensure the estimate’s conservativeness.  
• If a measurement instrument is not functioning properly, it shall be replaced as soon as possible. In the meantime, an instrument exhibiting higher uncertainty may be used, if available. If no other instrument is available, the missing data should be estimated conservatively. For flow meters, an average flow rate determined during the same reporting period might be used, adding some supplement (e.g. one standard deviation) to the data to ensure the estimate’s conservativeness. In other cases, e.g. heat measurements, an estimate may be based on the energy efficiency of the process determined over the reporting period, adding some supplement. 
• The chosen approach for filling the data gap should be put down in the monitoring methodology documentation for future use. Furthermore , a regular 
review should be performed to identify options to avoid similar data gaps in the future (e.g. by ensuring that reserve units are kept in stock for critical measurement instruments).  
 
6.10 Reporting  the effective carbon price due  
In order to  ensure the fair treatment of goods  produced in different installations in different 
jurisdictions, it is necessary for you, as an installation operator , to inform  to the importer  
of the effective  carbon price
110 due where  CBAM goods  are produced, before th e CBAM 
obligation for the CBAM goods produced can be determined .  
The ‘ effective carbon price’ is the actual price per tonne due for the installation’s 
production processes as well as for relevant precursor materials used in the production and 
should take into account:  
• The actual price of a tonne CO 2e in the carbon pricing scheme in the jurisdiction;  
• The coverage of emissions of the production processes in the carbon pricing 
scheme (direct, indirect, types of GHG, etc.)  
• Any applicable ‘rebates’111, i.e. t he amount of free allocation (in the case of an 
ETS) or any financial support, compensation or other form of rebate received in that jurisdiction, per tonne of the product relevant for the CBAM ; and  
• In the case of complex goods, t he carbon price due (after  any rebates received) of  
any relevant precursor materials consumed in the production process.  
 
110  The CBAM Regulation defines: ‘carbon price’ means the monetary amount paid in a third country, 
under a carbon emissions reduction scheme, in the form of a tax, levy or fee or in the form of emission 
allowances under a greenhouse gas emissions trading system, calculated on greenhouse gases covered by such a measure, and released during the production of good.  
111  The Implementing Regulation defines: ‘rebate’ means any amount that reduces the amount due or paid by a person liable for the payment of a carbon price, before its payment or after, in a monetary form or in any other form . 
155 In the transitional period this is a reporting obligation for importers; however, in the 
definitive period disclosure of this information will give importers  a rebate in the amount 
otherwise due to be paid  by the person liable for the CBAM obligation.  
If your installation is subject to a carbon price, you will have to collect information on the carbon price due before the CBAM obligation, in such a way that you can attribute it to 
production processes and CBAM goods categories in a similar way as you attribute emissions to the goods.  
If there is a carbon pricing system in operation in the country (or region or smaller 
jurisdiction) where your installation is situated , then  the actual price per tonne CO
2e that 
has already been paid need s to be monitor ed and relevant information communicated to 
importers for their CBAM quarterly report.  
The procedure for monitoring and calculating the effective carbon price  should be included 
in the monitoring methodology documentation; additionally, if relevant precursors from 
another installation are used in the production process , you also need to obtain the same 
information from the supplier for  each  precursor  good supplied. 
The carbon price due  may be attributed to a production process and aggregated goods 
category in a similar way to how specific embedded emissions are calculated, and should 
be expressed as e uros per tonne of CBAM good . This is calculated as follows : 
• Establish the total quantity of emissions emitted and the carbon price, and from 
this calculate the total carbon price due in the reporting period. This calculation 
should be carried out at level of the production process112.  
• Divide the total carbon price due by the tonnes of CBAM good produced per 
production process to get price per tonne of CBAM good. 
For complex goods, where relevant precursors are consumed by the production process , 
the carbon price due by the supplier should be added to that determined for the complex 
CBAM good, and the resulting carbon price calculated . 
If the supplier  of the precursor does not provide the required information, you have to 
assume the carbon price due for the precursor t o be zero.  
The two main types of carbon pricing system in operation are an emissions trading system  
(ETS) or a carbon price in the form of  a tax, levy or fee . In these cases the  type of 
information that operators should report  are as follows : 
• Carbon price under a n Emission Trading System (ETS) :  
o The annual average price of allowances/certificates relating to one metric 
tonne of CO 2e in the applicable currency;  
 
112  Assuming that all emissions covered by the CBAM are also covered by the carbon price, you only need 
to split the carbon price due at installation level proportionally to  the split of the emissions to production 
processes. However, if the carbon price applies to only a part of the CBAM emissions (e.g. if process emissions are not covered by a tax on fuels only), a more appropriate approach such as a split per source stream  may be required.  
156 o Details o f the ETS rules113, such as whether it applies to direct and/or 
indirect emissions; 
o The total emissions for which you had to surrender allowances  or 
certificates;  
o The total number of allowances  or certificates which you received for 
free, as a ‘free allocation’;  
o The resulting difference between emissions and free allocation. If the 
latter exceeds the emissions, the carbon price due is to be reported as zero.  
• Carbon price in the form of a tax, levy or fee  :  
o The annual average amount of tax, levy or fee relating to one metric tonne 
of CO 2e in the applicable currency. If the amo unt is different e.g. for 
different fuels used, a weighted average rate corresponding to the fuel mix 
of your installation is to be determined for each reporting period;  
o Details on the rules  applicable113 to the tax, levy or fee , such as whether it 
applies to direct and/or indirect emissions or specific processes or fuels, etc.; 
o The total emissions for which you had to pay the carbon price under the 
tax, levy or fee ; 
o Any rebate you were allowed to apply to your payment  of the carbon tax, 
levy or fee ;  
o The resulting total carbon tax paid. If the rebate exceeds the tax rate 
before the application of the rebate (or refunding), the carbon price due is 
to be reported as zero.  
Other types of carbon price  system may be possible, such as Results -Based Climate 
Finance (RBCF) but these are not  typical of industry sectors , and are not eligible under the 
CBAM legislation . 
The exchange rate between the applicable currency of the carbon price due and euros will 
be applied automatically in the CBAM Transitional Registry when the CBAM Report is 
entered by the reporting declarant , using the average yearly exchange rate for the preceding 
year.  
During the transitional per iod, importers report details of  both the carbon price due and 
also the CBAM products covered  by the price due , as reported by the operators 
producing the CBAM goods. 
 
6.11 Reporting template 
This section outlines how you, as an operator, should account for and  report production 
and embedded emissions during the CBAM transitional period. Note that there is no formal 
reporting obligation like in other carbon pricing systems for you as an operator, but only 
the need to communicate  the emissions data to EU importers of your goods. The textbox 
 
113  Importers will have to provide a d escription and indication of legal act –  i.e. provide the regulation 
reference, ideally as internet link. Therefore, you should also provide this information.  
157 below signposts the key sections in the Implementing Regulation for reporting, relevant 
for the CBAM transitional period.  
Implementing Regulation references:  
Annex II, Section 1 Definitions . 
Annex III, Section F Rules for attributing emissions from an installation to goods.  
Annex III, Section I Communication by the operator of the data for the use by the reporting declarant in 
the CBAM report.  
Default values for the calculation of embedded emissions, determined  by the European Commission and 
published on their dedicated website for the CBAM.  
 
 
Installation operators are responsible for monitoring and reporting the embedded e missions 
of goods they have produced and are exporting to the EU, to the importers of these goods. Importers or ‘reporting declarants’ must report on the embedded emissions of imported goods on a quarterly basis during the transitional period. 
The contents  of the operator’s recommended  ‘Emissions data communication’  to 
reporting declarants is provided in the Implementing Regulation Annex IV. Reporting 
declarant’s use the information in this communication to complete their CBAM reports on the CBAM T ransition al Registry. The structure of the CBAM report is given in the 
Implementing Regulation Annex I.  
An electronic version of the  Emissions data communication  template, in spreadsheet 
format, has been developed by the European Commission to help you, as an operator, share the necessary  embedded emissions data with reporting declarants . This is 
introduced by the following Figure 6-6 and the spreadsheet tool is available from the 
European Commission’s dedicated website for the CBAM.  
158 Figure 6- 6: Voluntary electronic data communic ation template – Contents page  
 
Key features include:  
• User -friendly navigation and automatic calculation of CBAM embedded 
emissions data from data inputs, showing how attributed emissions have been 
calculated for each production process.  
• Covers information for both Parts 1 and 2 in the operators’ report, identifies what data is required for the reporting declarants to complete the CBAM report and 
what data is optional, and provides guidance on how to use the template and on the different calculations performed.  
• Tools for facilitating reporting, for attributing emissions between heat and electricity for CHP/cogeneration and for calculating the carbon price due . 
• Summary sheets providing the main information on production processes and 
products to be communicated to the reporting declarant for their CBAM Reports. 
 
6.11.1 For operators  
The operator’s Emissions data communication template has two parts, the first contains all 
necessary information required by the reporting declarant to compile their CBAM report, 
whilst the second part is an optional section that is a recommended improvement  measure 
to provide greater transparency  of the data reported under Part 1. The contents are 
outlined in the following Table 6- 2 below.  

159 Table 6-2: Contents of the operators’ recommended ‘emissions data communication’ to 
importers  
Template  Summary of information required for the transitional period  
Part 1 – 
General 
information  Includes the data to be communicated to the reporting declarant.  
– Installation data, comprising identification and location details for the operator’s installation, and contact details for the operator’s authorised representative.  
– The production processes and routes under each aggregated goods 
category at the installation.  
– For each aggregated goods category or separately for each good by CN code:  
– The direct and indirect specific embedded emissio ns of each good; and 
for SEE indirect detail o n how the emission factor was determined and 
the information source used;  
– Information on what data quality and methods ( calculation -based, 
measurement -based, other ) were used for determining embedded 
emissions,  and whether this was based fully on monitoring, or if default 
values were used;  
– If default values were used, a short description why these were used instead of actual data;  
– Information on additional sector -specific reporting parameters for 
goods produced, if required; and  
– If applicable, information on a carbon price due , and separately for any 
precursors obtained from other installations, by the precursors’ country of origin. 
Part 2 – 
Optional information  Provides greater transparency of the data under Pa rt 1, and allows the 
reporting declarant to carry out validation checks on Part 1. 
– The total emissions of the installation, including: activity data and 
calculation factors for each source stream used; emissions of each 
emission source monitored using a me asurement -based methodology, and 
emissions determined by other methods; and if applicable, any CO 2 
imports or exports to other installations, for the reasons outlined above.  
– A ‘heat balance’ of imported, produced, consumed and exported 
measurable heat, and similarly balances for waste gases or electricity.  
– A list of all relevant goods by CN code produced by the installation, including precursors not covered by separate production processes.  
– For precursor goods:  
160 Template  Summary of information required for the transitional period  
– The quantity  received from elsewhere.  
– Their specific direct and indirect embedded emissions (as reported by 
other operators).  
– The quantity used in each production process, excluding precursor goods produced in the same installation. 
– For attributed direct and indirect  emissions: information on how the 
attributed emissions of each production process were calculated; the 
activity level and attributed emissions of each production process.  
– A short description of the installation, covering: relevant and non -relevant 
(out of  scope) production processes;  
– The main production processes taking place at the installation and any production processes not covered for the purposes of the CBAM;  
– The main elements of the monitoring methodology being used; and  
– What measures to improve data quality have been taken, in particular whether any form of verification (in the definitive period) was applied. 
– information on the electricity emissions factor i n the power purchase 
agreement, where appropriate.  
Source: Annex IV to the Implementing Regulation. 
 In order to  supply the recommended optional data under Part 2 above, you, as an operator 
may need to supply supplementary files with this information, to the reporting declarant.  
 
6.11.2 For reporting declarants  
During the transitional period reporting declarants should submit CBAM reports on the 
CBAM T ransitional R egistry, using the structure laid out in the Implementing Regulation 
Annex I ‘Information to be submitted in the CBAM reports’. The information on embedded emissions relevant for the CBAM report is supplied by the  Part 1 of the 
operator’s Emissions data communication, listed in Table 6- 2 above.  
 If the voluntary electronic data communication template is used by the operator to communicate the information on embedded emissions to you, as the reporting declarant, then information required for the CBAM quarterly report is found in the ‘Summary Communication ’ sheet at the back of the spreadsheet.  
 
161 Figure 6-7: Summary Communication sheet, voluntary electronic data communication 
template  
 
 
Relevant parameters calculated for reporting purposes in these summary sheet include:  
• Amount of carbon price due  
• Electri city consumed  
• Specific (direct) embedded emissions  
• Specific (indirect) embedded emissions  
• Sector -specific parameters, e.g. alloy content  
 Although the spreadsheet is voluntary to use, reporting declarants can request that 
operators provide their emissions  communication using this template.  
   

162 7 SECTOR SPECIFIC MONITORING AND REPORTING  
Section  5 deals with the specification of products covered by the CBAM and the relevant 
production routes. This section  now continues with sector -specific details, in particular by 
adding sector -specif ic monitoring and reporting requirements, and by providing elaborated 
examples for each sector.  
While this guidance document is intended primarily for use by operators who produce 
tangible goods falling under the CBAM, section 7.6 contains also some information for 
importers of electricity as good under the CBAM. 
Note on examples : While the examples are intended primarily for readers from the specif ic 
sectors, readers are invited to also learn from the other examples, as each example also 
contains concepts which may be of interest to other sectors. In particular:  
• Section 7.1.2 (Cement sector) provides an example of a step -by-step approach to 
splitting an installation into production processes;  
• That example is further elaborated in section 7.1.3, there the example is described 
alternatively using the ‘bubble approach’. Furthermore , it demonstrates that a mix 
of materials (limestone and other minerals) can be jointly monitored as ‘raw 
meal’, which suits better the existing situation of the installation.  
• The first example of the steel sector ( 7.2.2.1 ) deals with an integrated steel works. 
Here the ‘bubble approach’ for defining production processes with a view of 
minimising monitoring efforts is demonstrated. Furthermore , electr icity 
generation from waste gases and the use of the plant’s own electricity emission 
factor for indirect emissions is demonstrated (where a part of electricity also 
comes from the grid).  
• The second steel example (section 7.2.2.2) deals with the production of high- alloy 
steel using the Electric A rc Furnace route. Here additional precursors are 
purchased and added to the installation’s own emissions. Furthermore , additional 
reporting requirements within the CN code are discussed. A s an additional 
feature, the calculation of embedded emissions of complex goods is performed in 
two different ways: in the first case, the total embedded emissions are calcul ated 
before dividing by the activity level ; in the second case, the calculation is carried 
out using specific embedded emissions of the precursors. 
• Both steel examples use a mass balance calculation, as the steel products and 
slags contain carbon that is n ot emitted as CO 2. 
• The fertilizer  example (section 7.3.2)  shows a situation where almost the 
complete embedded emissions come from the two purchased precursors ammonia 
and urea. Note that in the example all the emissions are only CO 2, although in this 
sector N 2O emissions would be relevant, too. In case the installation would use 
nitric acid as a precursor (e.g. substituting the sulphuric aci d of the example), then 
the N 2O emissions embedded in the nitric acid would be added like any other 
embedded emissions. 
• The example for aluminium ( section 7.4.2) shows a  situation where a part of the 
installation (the production of prebaked anodes) is not subject to the CBAM, and 
the related source streams have to be properly separated.  
163 • Hydrogen example No.1 ( section 7.5.2.1, production route: methane steam 
reforming) demonstrates how exported heat is to be taken into account for 
attributing emissions.  
• Hydrogen example No.2 ( section 7.5.2.2, c hlor-alkali electrolysis)  is a process 
where only indirect emissions apply. They are split between the three main products of the process as required by the Implementing Regulation. 
Throughout all examples, different assumptions are made for the electricity received from the grid, resulting in different emission factors for electricity. Those different values may serve to learn about orders of magnitude of these factors.  
 
7.1 Cement  sector  
The textbox below signposts sector -specific sections in the Implementing Regulation, 
relevant for the CBAM transitional period .  
Implementing Regulation references:   
• Annex II, Section 3 – Special provisions and emissions monitoring requirements by production 
route . Sub-sections 3.2 to 3.5 (cement sector aggregated goods  categories ).  
• Annex III , Section B – Monitoring of direct emissions at installation level, sub- section B.9.2 . 
Sector specific requirements, additional rules for process emissions from the cement sector, 
covering: B.9.2.1  additional rule for Method A (input based) ; B.9.2.2  additi onal rule for Method B 
(output based) ; B.9.2.3  additional rule for emissions related to  discarded cement kiln dust /bypass 
dust.  
• Annex IV , Section 2 – Sector specific parameters for CBAM goods that should be reported by 
producers of goods to importers, in the Emissions Data Communication.  
 
7.1.1 Sector -specific requirements  for m onitoring and reporting  
Direct and indirect embedded emissions should be monitored in line with the methodology 
set out in the Implementing Regulation and outlined above.  
7.1.1.1 Emissions covered   
Relevant direct emissions that should be monitored and reported for the cement sector are:  
• Carbon dioxide emissions (direct) from the fuel combustion process114 from 
stationary plant only (excludes emissions from any mobile plant such as vehicles).  
• Carbon dioxide emissions (direct) from the process, resulting from:  
o Thermal decomposition of carbonate containing raw materials ( such as 
limestone , dolomite  etc);  
 
114  For both kiln and non- kiln fuels. Cemen t kiln fuels include conventional fossil fuels such as natural gas 
and coal, alternative fossil -based fuels such as petroleum coke or waste chipped vehicle tyres, and 
biomass fuels (biomass wastes) . Non -kiln fuels refers to  fuels used outside of kilns  e.g. to calcine  clays 
in flash calciners, and where cement materials are dried.   
164 o Non-carbonate carbon content in the raw materials (such as carbonaceous 
clay, limestone, shale);  
o Alternative raw material (such as fly ash used in the raw meal), or from any 
fossil/biomass additives used. 
o Discarded cement kiln dust (CKD) or bypass dust. 
• Carbon dioxide emissions (direct) resulting from the production of measurabl e 
heating (e.g. steam) and cooling that is consumed within the system boundaries of 
the production process, regardless of the location of the production of the heat (i.e. 
from on -site generation or from imports from off -site).  
• Carbon dioxide emissions (dir ect) resulting from emissions control (e.g. from 
carbonate raw materials such as soda ash used for acidic flue gas cleaning). This is 
included for any good where this is applicable.  
Direct emissions from the different source streams above are not reported separately but 
are added together to result in the total direct emissions for the installation or production process.  
Indirect emissions from electricity consumed must be reported separately from direct emissions.  
7.1.1.2 Additional rules  
Determining process emissions  
For determining direct emissions from cement clinker production, additional rules also 
apply for the monitoring of process emissions from raw meal components depending on 
whether the activity data refers to:  
• Process input  material (e.g. limestone) based on:  
o the carbonate content of the process input (calculation Method A ); and 
o an adjustment is made for cement kiln dust (CKD) or bypass dust that 
leaves  the kiln system . 
• Process output  material e.g. the amount of clinker produced (calculation Method 
B). 
Note that both methods are considered equivalent, i.e. you, as the operator , should choose 
the method which leads to the more reliable data, which is more applicable for your  
equipment, and that avoids unreasonable costs. Calculation methods A and B are further 
described in section 6.5.1.1 of this guidance document. 
Calculation of emissions related to discarded CKD or bypass dust  
As the operator, you shall add CO
2 process emissions, from bypass dust or cement kiln 
dust (CKD) leaving the kiln system, corrected for a partial calcination ratio of CKD.  
• Minimum requirements: An emission factor of 0,525 t CO 2/t dust is applied.  
 
165 Recommended improvement : The emission factor (EF) is determined at least once 
annually in line with the provisions of Implementing Regulation Annex III, B.5.4. 
requirements for laboratory analyses115 and using the following formula:  
𝐴𝐴𝐹𝐹𝑁𝑁𝐶𝐶𝐷𝐷=�𝐸𝐸𝐹𝐹𝐶𝐶𝑙𝑙𝑑𝑑
1+𝐸𝐸𝐹𝐹𝐶𝐶𝑙𝑙𝑑𝑑∙𝑑𝑑�/�1−𝐸𝐸𝐹𝐹𝐶𝐶𝑙𝑙𝑑𝑑
1+𝐸𝐸𝐹𝐹𝐶𝐶𝑙𝑙𝑑𝑑∙𝑑𝑑�  (Equation 28)  
Where:  
EFCKD … Emission factor of partially calcined cement kiln dust [t CO 2/t CKD];  
EFCli … Installation -specific emission factor of clinker [t CO 2/t clinker]; 
d … Degree of CKD calcination (released CO 2 as percentage of total carbonate 
CO 2 in the raw mix).  
 
Method B  - clinker output based 
For this method, a sector -specific rule is given in the Implementing Regulation : 
Activity data  AD j for clinker production [t] over the reporting period may be  determined 
by either : 
o Direct weighing of clinker (if technically feasible); or  
o Based on cement deliveries, by material balance using the following stock 
adjustment calculation: 
𝑁𝑁𝐶𝐶𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖𝐷𝐷𝑐𝑐𝑝𝑝=(𝑁𝑁𝑎𝑎𝑚𝑚𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝐷𝐷𝑑𝑑−𝑁𝑁𝑎𝑎𝑚𝑚𝑆𝑆𝑉𝑉)∙𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝐶𝐶−𝑁𝑁𝐶𝐶𝐷𝐷𝑐𝑐+𝑁𝑁𝐶𝐶𝐷𝐷𝑝𝑝−𝑁𝑁𝐶𝐶𝐷𝐷𝑆𝑆𝑉𝑉 (Equation 27)  
Where  
Cliprod is the amount of clinker produced expressed in tonnes,  
Cem deliv the amount of cement deliveries expressed in tonnes,  
Cem SV the cement stock variations expressed in tonnes,  
CCR  the clinker to cement ratio (tonnes clinker per tonne cement),  
Clis the amount of clinker supplied expressed in tonnes,  
Clid the amount of clinker dispatched, and  
CliSV the amount of clinker stock variations expressed in tonnes.  
The standard emission factors  EFj a standard value of 0,525 t CO 2/t clinker is applied, as 
a minimum requir ement. Recommended improvement would be to perform analyses of the 
clinker to determine the EF.  
For the conver sion factor  CF j It is allowed to always use the conservative assumption that 
CF j = 1 in order to reduce monitoring efforts.  
 
  
 
115  Guidance on requirements for laboratory analyses is given in section 6.5.1.4.  
166 Clinker to cement ratio (CCR)  
In calculating the embedded emissions in cement goods, the majority of emissions result 
from cement clinker. Therefore, the CCR, which is the mass ratio of tonnes cement clinker consumed per tonne of cement produced (also know n as the ‘clinker factor’), must be taken 
into account.  
The CCR should be derived either:  
o Separately for each of the different cement products, based on laboratory analyses in line with the provisions of Annex Section B.5.4; or  
o By calculation, as ratio fr om the difference of cement deliveries and stock 
changes and all materials used as additives to the cement including by- pass dust 
and cement kiln dust. 
The CCR is expressed as a percentage (%) value, which typically ranges from 80 up to 95 % for Portland c ement. The CCR is particularly relevant for the calculation of relevant 
embedded emissions for blended or composite cements that are produced, where the clinker content can range widely for different types of composite cement
116 with the 
balance being made up of other constituents such as mineral additives,117 with zero 
emissions.  
 
7.1.1.3 Additional reporting parameter s 
The following Table 7-1 lists out the additional information that should be provided by 
you as an operator to importers, in your emissions data communication to them.  
Table 7 -1: Additional cement sector parameters requested in the CBAM report  
Aggregated goods 
category  Reporting param eter  
Calcined clay118 – Whether or not the clay is calcined . 
Cement clinker  – None. 
Cement  – Clinker content of cement. This is the:  
– Mass ratio of tonnes cement clinker consumed per produced 
tonne of cement ( clinker to cement ratio  or CCR) ;  
– Is expressed as percentage.  
Aluminous cement  – None. 
 
116  European standard EN 197- 1 defines five main common cement types CEM I (Portland cement) to V 
(Composite cement) and 27 different product types, where the clinker content in blended and composite 
cements (CEM II to V) may range from 95% down to as low as 5- 20%.  
117  Mineral additives (mainly gypsum) along with secondary mineral additives (blast furnace slag and fly 
ash) are excluded from consideration under the CBAM and therefore have zero embedded emissions.  
118  Note that clays falling under CN code 2507 00 8 0 that are not calcined, are assigned embedded emissions 
of zero. They are still to be report ed, but no additional information from the producer of the clay needs 
to be obtained.  
167 You need to ensure that you collect all the parameters necessary for your CBAM goods 
and communicate them to the importers of your goods. The importer will need to report the additional parameters when the goods are imported to the EU under the CBAM. 
7.1.2 Example for splitting a cement installation into separate production processes 
In defining the system boundary for a production process, you as an operator will need to 
decide what physical production units belong to the production process (es) and what 
inputs, outputs, and emissions are relevant. The approach for doing this is discussed in 
Section 6.3 above and an example of this is given as shown in the Table 7-2 below for the cement sector . 
For a notional cement plant that both produces and exports cement clinker (CN 2523 10 00) and cement (CN 2523 29 00), the operator would need to go through the following steps to split the cement plant into separate production processes under the CBAM: 
Step 1: List all goods, physical units, inputs, outputs and emissions to/from the installation. 
In this first step, the operator uses the existing information available on their installation , 
such as  lists of industrial equipment and plans, to identify  the: 
• Physical units carrying out the production processes at their installation, such as kilns, boilers, dryers, flue gas cleaning, ball mills, bagging plant.  
• Process inputs required for making the goods e.g. raw materials, fuel, electricity.  
• Outputs from the process e.g. goods produced, by-products, heat, waste gases . 
• Emissions  from the process.  
These are then listed out in Table 7-2 following. 
Table 7-2: Checklist for inputs, physical units, outputs and emissions  for an example  cement 
installation. 
Inputs  Physical units  Outputs  Relevant C BAM 
Emissions  
Kiln – fossil fuels119  
e.g. coal, HFO  Kiln system and associated 
equipment e.g. for raw meal 
preparation  
Mill – grinding equipment (including dryer) and 
associated plant e.g. for 
bagging cement Kiln – cement 
clinker122 
Mill – cement 
goods, by type123 Kiln – direct 
emissions from combustion of 
fuels  
 
119  Fuels combusted to generate heat for the use in the process under consideration or elsewhere. Both the 
fuel quantity (and in particular its carbon content / emission factor) as well its energy content are relevant for attributing it to different production processes.  
122  Precursor or intermediate good or product: where the production process also includes a ‘finished’ good.  
The precursor product may also be an output from the installation; for example, if the operator exported both cement clinker and cement from the installation.  
123  Cement finished good – physical product output of the installation/production process monitor ed. 
168 Inputs  Physical units  Outputs  Relevant C BAM 
Emissions  
Kiln – alternative and 
waste fuels (to 
cement clinker kiln) 
e.g. high CV fraction of MSW
120 
Kiln – electricity 
consumed by clinker 
kiln and associated 
equipment  
Mill – fossil fuels to 
cement dryer  
Mill – electricity 
consumed by cement 
grinding plant and associated equipment  
Kiln – raw 
materials
121: 
Limestone, clays  
Kiln – alternative raw 
materials: e.g. fly ash  
Mill – cement clinker 
from kiln  
Mill – additives used 
in cement manufacture  Other industrial equipment 
unrelated to cement 
production (to be excluded 
from system boundaries). 
Heat exchanger for district heating 
Flue gas cleaning equipment 
(for treating gaseous and 
dust emissions)  Kiln – other 
outputs124: e.g. 
cement kiln dust  
District heating, 
(or cooling or 
electricity)125 Kiln – direct 
emissions from 
alternative and 
waste fuels  
Kiln – indirect 
emissions from 
electricity 
consumed. 
Kiln – direct 
process emissions 
from carbonates  
Mill – indirect 
emissions from 
electricity consumed. 
 
Step 2: Identify relevant production processes and production routes. 
In this step, the operator  identifies that the installation  produces cement clinker and cement, 
each of which is an aggregated goods category  listed  in Table 1 of Section 2 of Annex II 
of the Implementing Regulation (and in section  5 of this guidance document). 
 
120  High calorific value fraction of municipal solid waste  
121  Raw materials are materials which participate in other chemical reactions or which are physically 
modified in the process for generating the product.  
124  Other products (by- products) and waste: only need to be monitored if relevant in terms of carbon content 
for the determination of the production process’s emissions, and energy content for corroboration 
purposes.  
125  Measurable heat (or cooling or electricity, if fuels are used in their generation) exported from a CBAM installation or production process should be treated like a second product, i.e. a certain amount of emissions must be subtracted from the emissions of that production process.  
169 Each aggregated goods category is  defined as a single production process.  The operator 
uses the Table 7-2 as a checklist for assigning the relevant inputs, outputs and emissions 
to each production processes. This is relatively simple in most cases, for example:  
• Cement clinker production process:  
o Physical units: Cement kiln, including preheaters, pre -calciner, clinker 
cooler, and associated auxiliary equipment such as flue gas cleaning. 
o Inputs  / sources streams: Fuels, electricity, raw materials and alternative 
raw materials for the process.  
o Outputs (goods): Cement clinker , kiln dust ( re-introduced it into the 
clinker production process) . 
o Other outputs: measurable heat exported to district heating network.  
o Emission  sources : direct (combustion and process) and indirect emissions 
(electricity consumed) related to the kiln system.  
• Cement production process:  
o Physical units: Grinding plant, direct fired dryer and associated auxiliary 
equipment e.g. cement bagging plant. 
o Inputs  / source streams : Cement clinker, electricity, fuels for the dryer, 
additive materials used in making cement such as gypsum. 
o Outputs (goods): Cement. 
o Emission  sources : direct (from cement dryer, if applicable) and indirect 
emissions (from electricity consumed) related to the grinding process.  
 
Using a  schematic helps to visualise  the respective system boundaries  of each production 
process and production route , and to assign inputs, outputs and emissions accordingly.  
170 Figure 7-1: Schematic used to define the system boundaries of an example cement clinker and 
cement  processes  
  
 
 
In the case of the above cement installation, both the kiln system and cement grinding plant 
are relatively self -contained  parts of the installation , without shared equipment, and  there 
is no doubt about the system  boundaries of each production process . The only element that 
is not widely found in this industry is the heat recovery form the clinker kiln for the purpose of district heating. In practice it would not be a separate production process, but in calculating the attributed emissions of the clinker p roduction process, the heat would be 
taken into account as shown in sections 6.2.2.2 and 6.7.2. 
The following worked example for the cement sector shows how, for the production 
processes defined, relevant emissions are calculated and assigned to production processes, and specific embedded emissi ons are calculated. For simplification, the district heating is 
omitted in that example , as are the additional direct emissions from the dryer before the 
cement grinding. 
 
7.1.3 Worked example for the cement sector  
The following worked example shows how specific embedded emissions are derived for 
cement sector goods. The resulting embedded emissions of imports into the EU are then  
calculated  at the end of the example for reporting in the transitional period. 
In this example the installation produces two products, cement clinker and cement , each 
of which is defined as a single production process, as each is a separate category of CBAM aggregated good.  Installation boundaries
Natural gasProcess “cement”Process “Clinker”
Cement 
clinker kiln
Cement 
grindingClinkerHard coalRaw meal
HFO
Municipal wasteHeatDistrict 
Heating
Cement

171 Figure 7-2 gives an outline view of the  installation and shows the system boundaries as a  
hatched line for each production process. The physical units carrying out each production 
process have been grouped under ‘Clinker production’ a nd ‘Cement mill’ and the different 
inputs and outputs and sources of emissions have been identified for each production 
process.  
Figure 7- 2: Cement example – Overview   
 
 
 
The two relevant production processes defined above are:  
• Production process 1 – cement clinker  produced in a c ement kiln . The system 
boundaries of this production process have been defined as including inputs of raw 
material s (limestone and other minerals ), fuel s (coal, he avy fuel oil (HFO)  and 
fractions of household waste)  and electrical energy.  Output from the process is 
cement clinker that is a relevant precursor for production process 2.  
• Production process 2 – cement produced in a cement mill. The system boundaries 
of this production process have been defined as including the inputs gypsum  (which 
as a raw material has no embedded emissions, precursor cement clinker (which has 
embedded emissions) and electrical energy . Output from the process is cement.  
In this case, as all the output from production process 1 of precursor cement clinker goes directly into production process 2, it is possible to define  a joint production process , or 
‘bubble’ , whereby the s ystem boundari es of the production process es are combined, as 
shown in Figure 7- 3.
 
 

172 Figure 7-3: Cement example – joint production process (‘bubble approach’) and complete 
monitoring approach – all red elements need to be monitored . 
 
 
 
The system boundary has been redrawn to encompass both production processes 
previously defined for each CBAM aggregated good.  The inputs and outputs highlighted in red text above are the parameters that would need to 
be monitored by the operator in order to attribute emissions and determine direct and indirect specific embedded emissions for both production processes.  
The direct and indirect emissions that are monitored in this example result from: 
• Direct emissions from f uel combustion – fossil fuels (coal and HFO) and from a 
mixed fossil/biomass fuel derived from household waste (an alternative fuel ). 
• Direct  emissions from the p rocess  – resulting from the thermal decomposition of 
carbonates in the raw meal input (produced from limestone and other minerals) t o 
the cement kiln system.  
• Indirect emissions from the electrical energy consumed by the joint production 
process . 
The activity level of cement also need s to be monitored. As can be seen, the monitoring 
becomes significantly simpler with  this ‘bubble approach”. In particular, the clinker 
amount and the associated embedded emissions do not have to be monitored separately, and there is no need to split quantities of electrical energy consumed according to the two processes.  
The following tables summarise the f uel, electrical energy and raw material inputs 
monitored for determining specific embedded emissions  (SEE) . The calculation of the SEE 
values is carried  out in two steps : 
• Step 1 – derives SEE values  for relevant precursor cement clinker ; and  

173 • Step 2 – derives SEE values  for cement , taking into account i) embedded emissions  
of the precursor , and ii) the clinker to cement ratio (CCR) , as well as any additional 
emissions occurring during the process .  
Note that if  any cement clinker produced by the install ation were to be diverted and 
separately sold, the embedded emissions calculated under step  1 would also need to be 
communicated  by the operator  to the purchaser of the cement clinker goods . In that case 
the ‘bubble approach’ would not be allowed.  
Table 7 -3: Calculation of direct and indirect emissions, and SEE values for cement clinker  
Direct emissions  AD (t) NCV (GJ/t)  EF (t CO 2/t 
or 
t CO 2/TJ) Biomass  
% Emissions 
fossil (t 
CO 2) Emissions 
biomass  
(t CO 2) 
Process emissions  
Raw meal (standard 
factor)126 1 255 000   0,525   658 875   
Combustion emissions  
Coal  88 000  25 95  209 000  0 
High NCV household 
waste127 25 000  20 83 15% 35 275  6 225  
HFO 43 000  40 78  134 160  0 
Total direct emissions      1 037 310   
Indirect emissions  AD ( MWh )  EF (t CO 2 / 
MWh)   Emissions  
(t CO 2)  
Electricity consumed  81 575   0,833   67 953   
Clinker production 
(tonnes)  1 255 000       
Step 1: Specific embedded emission ( SEE)  values are derived using direct and indirect emissions and activity 
data for cement clinker.  
Cement clinker Direct  Indirect      
SEE 0,8265 0,0541  t CO 2 / t    
 
In the Table 7-3 above , step 1 is to calculate and attribute direct and indirect emissions 
associated with the production of cement clinker  in the reporting period and derive SEE 
values for the amount of clinker produced.  
Note that  the emission factor used for raw meal above is a  standard emission factor given 
in Implementing Regulation  (EU) 2023/1773, Annex III , section  B.9.2.2, which states that, 
as a minimum requirement to determine the emission factor, a standard value of 0,525 t 
CO 2/t cement clinker is applied.  
 
126  Stand ard emission factor for cement clinker given in Implementing Regulation Annex III B.9.2.2., which 
states that a s a minimum requirement to determine the emission factor, a standard value of 0,525 t CO 2/t 
cement clinker is applied.  
127  Biomass being the biode gradable fraction in municipal waste. If the emission factor and/or NCV for 
municipal waste is not known, the standard values in Implementing Regulation Annex VIII Table 2 
should be used, which are 11,6 GJ/t and 100 t  CO 2/TJ. 
174 Note also that the direct emissions associated with the biomass content of the household 
waste is calculated separately and is deducted from the total direct emissions. This is 
because the biodegradable fraction of municipal waste (given as 15%, above) is treated as biomass and is effectively  zero-rated for total emissions, as the RED II sustainability 
criteria do not apply to household / municipal waste.  
Table 7 -4: Calculation of total direct and indirect SEE values for cement final product  (Step 2)  
Portland cement production    Comment  
tonnes clinker / tonne cement 
ratio 0,95  This is the CCR for Portland cement. The CCR is specific to the cement product produced.  
 MWh/t  t CO 2/t  
Additional electricity 
consumption  0,85 0,0708  For the cement grinding production process. Calculated as MWh/t x EF for electricity . 
Step 2: SEE values are derived for final cement product including the embedded emissions from the relevant 
precursor cement clinker 
Cement  SEE Direct  SEE Indirect   
 t CO 2 / t 
cement  t CO 2 / t 
cement   
Contribution of precursor 
(clinker)  0,7852 0,0514  Calculated using the CRR , for example for SEE 
direct as 0,8265 t CO 2 / t x 0,95 = 0,7852 t CO 2 / t 
Production process   0,0708  As above  
Total specific embedded 
emissions  0,7852 0,1222  Sum of SEEs  
 
The total embedded emissions  to be reported by the authorised declarant (EU importer)  for 
the import of Portland cement into the EU during the transitional period may then be 
determined , for example, for the import of 100 tonnes of Portland cement:  
• Transitional period (report only):  
o Direct embedded emissi ons = 100 t  x 0,7852 t CO 2 / t = 78,52 t CO 2 
o Indirect embedded emissions = 100 t  x 0,1222 t CO 2 / t = 12,22 t CO 2 
Total: 90,74 t CO 2 
 
7.2 Iron and Steel  sector  
The textbox below signposts sector -specific sections in the Implementing Regulation, 
relevant for th e CBAM transitional period .  
Implementing Regulation  references:  
• Annex II, Section 3 – Special provisions and emissions monitoring 
requirements by production route . Sub- sections 3.11 to 3.16 ( iron and s teel 
sector aggregated goods categories)  
175 • Annex IV , Section 2 – Sector specific parameters for CBAM goods that 
should be reported by producers of goods to importers, in the E missions D ata 
Communication . 
Annex VIII , Sections 1 and 2 – Standard emission factors used in the 
monitoring of direct emissions at installation level, including: Table 1: fuel 
emission factors including waste gases, Table 3: process emissions from carbonates, Table 5: process emissions from ot her process materials used in 
the production of iron and steel. 
 
7.2.1 Sector -specific requirements  for monitoring and reporting  
Direct and indirect embedded emissions should be monitored in line with the methodology 
set out in the Implementing Regulation and outlined in section 6 of this guidance 
document .  
7.2.1.1 Emissions monitoring  
Relevant emissions that should be monitored and reported for the iron and steel sector are:  
• Carbon dioxide emissions (direct) from the fuel combustion process including 
waste or off -gases such as blast furnace gas (BFG), from stationary units only 
(excludes emissions from any mobile machinery such as vehicles).   
• Carbon dioxide emissions (direct) from the process, resulting from the reduction of 
iron and steel by reducing agents such as coke or natural gas, from the thermal decomposition of carbonate raw materials
128, from the carbon content of scrap or 
alloys , graphite129 or other carbon containing materials entering the process . 
• Carbon dioxide emissions (direct) resulting from the production of measurable 
heating (e.g. steam) and cooling that is consumed within the system boundaries of the production process, regardless of the location of the production of the heat (i.e. from on -site gen eration or from imports from off -site).  
• Carbon dioxide emissions (direct) resulting from emissions control (e.g. from carbonate raw materials such as soda ash used for acidic flue gas cleaning). This is included for any good where this is applicable.  
Direct emissions from the different source streams above are not reported separately but are added together  to result in the total direct emissions for the installation or production 
process.  
In deriving total direct emissions, carbon remaining in aggregated ir on and steel goods 
such as pig iron, DRI, crude steel or iron alloys, or in slags or wastes , is also taken into 
account by using a mass balance method.  
 
128  Such as limestone, dolomite  and carbonatic iron ores, including FeCO 3, 
129 Such as graphite blocks used inside the blast furnace, or electrodes or electrode pastes  
176 
Simplified!  Indirect emissions from electricity consumed must be reported separately from direct 
emissions. Note that for this sector indirect emissions are only reported during the transitional period (and not during the definitive period) . 
7.2.1.2 Additional rules  
Attribution of emissions  
Given the complexity of production processes in the iron and steel sector, during the transitional per iod installations producing two or more goods from the groups sintered 
ore, pig iron, FeMn, FeCr, FeNi, DRI, crude steel, iron or steel products, may monitor and 
report embedded emissions defining one joint production process , or ‘ bubble’ , for all 
the products from these groups covered, if none of the precursors produced within the installation are sold separately . 
7.2.1.3 Additional reporting parameters  
The following Table 7-5 lists out the additional information that should be provided by 
you as an operator to importers, in your emissions data communication to them. 
Table 7 -5: Additional iron and steel sector parameters requested in the CBAM report  
Aggregated good 
category  Reporting requirement  
Sintered Ore  – None . 
Pig Iron  – The main reducing agent used . 
– Mass % of Mn, Cr, Ni, total of other alloy elements . 
FeMn  Ferro -Manganese  – Mass % of Mn and carbon . 
FeCr – Ferro -
Chromium  – Mass % of Cr and carbon . 
FeNi – Ferro -Nickel  – Mass % of Ni and carbon . 
DRI (Direct Reduced 
Iron)  – The main reducing agent used . 
– Mass % of Mn, Cr, Ni, total of other alloy elements . 
Crude steel  – The main reducing agent of the precursor, if known . 
– Content of alloys in steel – expressed as:  
– Mass % of Mn, Cr, Ni, total of other alloy elements . 
– Tonnes scrap used for producing one  tonne  crude steel . 
– % of scrap that is pre -consumer scrap.  
Iron or steel products  – The main reducing agent used in precursor production, if 
known. 
177 Aggregated good 
category  Reporting requirement  
– Content of alloys in steel – expressed as:  
– Mass % of Mn, Cr, Ni, total of other alloy elements. 
– Mass % of materials contained which are not iron or steel, 
if their mass is more than 1 % to 5% of the total good’s 
mass . 
– Tonnes scrap used for producing one  tonne of the 
product . 
– % of scrap that is pre -consumer scrap.  
 
You need to ensure that you collect all the parameters necessary for your CBAM goods 
and communicate them to the importers of your goods. The importer will need to report 
the additional parameters when the goods are imported to the EU under the CBAM. 
 
7.2.2 Worked examples for the iron and steel sectors  
7.2.2.1 Example 1 – integrated steel works and conversion to iron or steel products . 
The following worked example shows how specific embedded emissions are derived for 
iron and steel sector goods , produced by the blast furnace/basic oxygen furnace ( BOF) 
route . The resulting embedded emissions of  imports into the EU are then calculated at the 
end of the example for reporting in the transitional period. 
In this example for integrated steel making, the installation produces five products, each 
of which is defined as a single production process, as each is a separate category of CBAM aggregated good.  
The diagram below gives an outline view of the installat ion and shows the system 
boundaries as a red (and blue) hatched line for each production process. The physical units 
carrying out each production process have been grouped under ‘Sinter plant’, ‘Blast furnace’, ‘LD converter’, and under forming as ‘Cold rolling, Hot rolling, Rail mill’ and ‘Power plant’; relevant inputs and outputs have been identified for each production 
process.  
178 Figure 7- 4: Example for carbon steel  production, blast furnace route – Overview  
 
 
 
The five relevant production processes defined above, and elaborated further in the 
diagrams below are:  
• Production process 1 – sinter (aggregated goods category ‘sintered ore’) produced 
in a sinter plant. The system boundaries of this production proc ess have been 
defined as including inputs of raw materials (iron ore), fuels (coke fines) and 
electrical energy. The sintered ore output from the process is a relevant precursor for production process 2.  
• Production process 2 –  pig iron (hot metal) produced by a blast furnace. The system 
boundaries of this production process have been defined as including inputs of raw 
materials lime, coke (which have no embedded emissions), precursor sintered ore (which has embedded emissions), fuels /reducing agents  includi ng coke and plastics 
waste from households ( i.e. a mixed waste fraction containing some biomass) , as 
well as  electrical energy. The pig iron output from the process is a relevant 
precursor for production process 3.  
• Production process 3 – crude steel produc ed by the LD (basic oxygen) converter 
steelmaking route. The system boundaries of this production process have been 
defined as including inputs of raw materials lime and steel scrap (which have no embedded emissions), precursor pig iron (which has embedded emissions), fuels 
(natural gas) and electrical energy. The crude steel output from the process is a relevant precursor for production process 4.  
• Production process 4 –  iron or steel products produced by different forming 
processes (hot rolling, cold rolling and rail mill) to give basic products such as bars, rods, rails and other rolled products. The system boundaries of this production 
process have been defined as including inputs of crude steel (which has embedded emissions), fuels (natural gas) and electrical energy. Outputs from the production 

179 process are all within the same aggregated goods category ‘ iron or steel products ’ 
(complex goods produced from the different precursors produced) that are sold. 
• Production process 5 – electricity produced fr om waste gas from blast furnace 
(production process 2). Blast furnace gas is transferred from production process 2 
to production process 5 and energy is recovered through the generation of electricity, for processes 1 to 4.  
The second diagram ( Figure 7-5) identifies  the different source streams as inputs into the 
production processes, giving rise to direct emissions.  
Figure 7-5: Example for c arbon steel  production, blast furnace route – Direct emissions and 
related source streams  
 
 
 
Direct emissions arise from the combustion of fuels (coke fines, plastic wastes, natural gas) 
and the waste gas (blast furnace gas) used for power generation, and from process 
emissions from coke130 as reducing agent and the thermal decomposition of carbona te-
containing materials (such as lime) and from releases of carbon contained within the different iron and steel materials.  
The third diagram  (Figure 7-6) below shows by the blue dashed line which electricity flows 
need to be monitored for indirect emissions , resulting from the consumption of electricity 
produced in the installation and purchased from the grid, consumed by production processes 1 to 4.  
 
 
 
130 Coke can also be treated as fuel, although it is primarily used as reducing agent . However, reporting it 
like a  fuel, i.e. including its NCV, has the advantage that it can be included in an energy balance for 
consistency checking . 

180 Figure 7-6: Example for carbon steel  production, blast furnace route –  Indirect emissions  
monitoring (electricity flows)  
 
  
 
Some of the waste gas (blast furnace gas) that is produced by production process 2 is 
recovered as a fuel for generating electricity through production process 5. This electricity is used within the installation, thereby reducing the amount of imported grid electricity that is required. The assumption in this example  is that the produced electricity is 100% 
consumed within the installation, but does not cover the complete electricity demand of the installation. Therefore, for indirect emissions calculation, a weighted average from the emission factor of the self -produced electricity and the grid electricity has to be calculated.  
During the transitional period , given the complexity  of production processes in the iron 
and steel sector, installations producing two or more of the sector’s aggregated goods categories (i.e. sintered ore, pig iron, DRI, crude steel and iron or steel products) are 
permitted to monitor and report embedded emissions by defining one joint production process or ‘bubble’,  for all the iron and steel aggregated goods categories covered, 
provided  that the precursors produced are wholly used to make the finished iron or steel 
products  (see section 6.3) .  
 

181 Figure 7-7: Example  for carbon steel  production, blast furnace route – complete monitoring 
approach. All parameters in red font need to be monitored.  
 
  
 
Figure 7-7 provides a complete monitoring approach for all source streams, for the example 
installation. In this figure a single bubbled system boundary has been drawn around 
production processes 1 to 4, for iron or steel products. Within the bubble, direct and indirect 
emissions for this production route result from:  
• Fuel combustion – direct emissions from the combustion of fossil fuels and waste 
gases.  
• Process emissions – direct emissions resulting from the thermal decomposition of 
carbonates, reductants (coke) and from the carbon content of iron and steel 
materials, including scrap . 
• Indirect emissions from the electrical energy consumed by the joint production process is monitored and reported in the transitional period.  
The inputs and outputs highlighted in red text are the parameters that would need to be monitored by the operator in order to attribute emissions and determine direct and indirect specific embedded emissions for the bubbled process. Monitoring encompasses both 
aspects, quantitative (activity data, see section 6.5.1.3) and qualitative (calculation factors, see section 6.5.1.4).  The activity levels for the different goods produced would also need 
to be monitored. However, applying the bubble approach, interim products (precursors), 
in this example sinter ed ore , pig iron and crude steel, do not have to be monitored. 
Furthermore, quantities of electricity and fuels used in more than one of the production processes, do not have to be split by use levels in the product ion process.  
Given the complexity of the installation with its different source streams and material flows, the mass balance method  (see section 6.5.1.2)  is used to give a complete balance of 
the amount of carbon entering and leaving the installation. In applying this method, the CO
2 quantities relevant for each source stream are calculated b ased on the carbon content 
(CC) in each material, without distinguishing fuels and process materials. Non- emitted 

182 carbon leaving the installation in products  and residues  instead of being emitted is also 
taken into account, by defining output source stream s, which have negative activity data, 
highlighted in red text in Table 7- 6. 
 
Table 7-6: Example  calcula tion for carbon steel  production, blast furnace route – Mass balance 
for the installation's d irect emissions . AD = Activity data, CC = carbon content.  
Consumption levels  AD (t)  CC Bio 
fraction  Emissi ons  
(t CO 2)131 Comments  
Coke fines  50 000  88,0%   161 216,0   
Iron ores  5 600 000  0,023%   4 719,2   
Coke  2 200 000  88,0%   7 093 504,0   
Plastic was tes 70 000  68,4%  16% 147 270,8  Biomass fraction132 =  
28 052 t  CO 2 
Scrap (external)  800 000  0,210%   6 155,5   
Scrap (internal)  200 000  0,180%   1 319,0   
Lime calcined  280 000  0,273%   2 800,0   
Natural gas  170 000  75,0%   467 160,0   
Other inputs  40 000  10,0%   14 656,0   
Sum     7 898 800,6   
Carbon in outputs  AD (t) CC  “Emissions”  
(negative ) (t CO 2)  
Steel  -4 800 000 0,180%   -31 657,0   
Slags  -1 000 000 0,030%   -1 099 ,0  
Sum     -32 756,2   
Total direct emissions of the installation  7 866 04 4,4  
 
In Table 7-6 above , the carbon content (CC) of the different input and output source 
stream s is converted  into its CO 2 equivalent , including for scrap from different  sources . 
Emissions from biomass in the mixed plastic waste (assuming this is derived from MSW) 
is zero-rated for emissions  (see section 6.5.4) . Total direct emissions, net of carbon in 
outputs, is  then calculated.  
Total  indirect emissions must then be calculated, along with a correction for waste gas 
from direct emissions that has been used to generate electricity.  The following assumptions 
have been made  for the purposes of this example . 
 
131  Factor 3,664 t CO 2 / t C 
132  Calculated above as 70 000 x 68,4% x 16% x 3,664 t CO 2 / t carbon = 28 052 t  CO 2 
183 Table 7 -7: Carbon steel, blast furnace route – Calculation of the installation's indirect e missions  
Installation’s Indirect Emissions  
Assumptions:  
− 40% of produced waste gas used for electricity production (35% efficiency) . 
− This covers 75% of electricity consumption, the rest comes from the grid.  
− Emission factor for waste gas is based on equivalent natural gas, but lower efficiency 
than in other natural gas power plants  (EF = 0,576 t CO 2 /MWh) . 
− Grid emission factor = 0,628 t CO 2 / MWh (Mix 50% coal, 30 % natural gas, rest 
renewable) . 
Weighted emissions factor of consumed electricity at installation:  0,589 t CO 2 / MWh . 
Total electricity consumption of installation:  1  658 844 MWh / year . 
Total indirect emissions of the installation:  977  059 t CO 2 / year . 
 
To avoid double counting of emissions  from waste gas used to generate electricity , it is 
necessary to make a deduction from direct emissions. The activity data for waste gas is 
calculated  from electricity generated, using the information on fuel input and generation 
efficiency given above, as follows : 
• Electricity generated from waste gas: 1 244 133 MWh (measured)  
• Total waste gas fuel input: 1 244 133 / 0,35 efficiency = 3 554 666 MWh  
• Converted to TJ: 3 544 666 * 0,0036 = 12 800 TJ  
The amount to deduct  from direct emissions for waste gas used to generate electricity is 
calculated in Table 7- 8 below , using the equation given in section 6.2.2.2 for  WG corr,exp . 
Table 7-8: Example calculation, c arbon steel, blast furnace route – installations’ total direct 
emissions corrected for waste gas deduction  
   t CO 2 / 
year  Comment  
Total direct emissions of the 
installation    7 866 044  From Table 7-6 above  
 AD (TJ)  EF (Nat. 
Gas)  Corr. 
factor    
Deduction for Waste gases  -12 800  56,1 0,667  – 478 959 Deduction for waste gas used to generate electricity  
Total direct emissions of the production process for crude steel products   7 387 085 Revised total direct emissions  
 
Next,  Table 7-9 gives example activity level data for goods produced in the example 
installation during the reporting period.   
184 Table 7 -9: Example a ctivity levels for goods produced in the reporting period  
Products  Activity  Level (AL)  Units 
Precursors    
Pig Iron  4 000 000  t / year  
Crude steel  5 000 000  t / year  
Iron or steel products   
Sheets  3 500 000  t / year  
Bars 800 000  t / year  
Rails  500 000  t / year  
Total goods produced  4 800 000  t / year  
Internal scrap  200 000  t / year  
 
Using the total direct and indirect emissions data from Table 7-7 and Table 7-8, and 
production data from  Table 7-9, direct and indirect specific embedded emissions are then 
calculated for iron or steel products, as follows  (Table 7- 10). 
 
Table 7-10: Example calculation, s pecific embedded emissions SEE under the simplified / "bubble" 
approach for iron or steel products  
Total amount of goods produced (steel products)  4 800 000  t / year  
Total direct emissions of the production process for steel products  7 387 085  t CO 2 / year  
Total indirect emissions of the installation  976 919  t CO 2 / year  
Specific direct embedded emissions  1,539  t CO 2 / steel product  
Specific indirect embedded emissions  0,204  t CO 2 / t steel product  
Specific total embedded emissions  1,743  t CO 2 / t steel product  
 
As a last step, the CBAM  reporting  obligation  for these iron or steel product s into the 
EU can then be determined. For example, for the import of 10 000 tonnes of iron or steel 
products e.g. rails:  
• Transitional period (report only):  
o Direct embedded emissions = 10  000 t x 1,539 t CO 2 / t = 15 390 t CO 2 
o Indirect embedded emissions = 10 000 t x 0,204 t CO 2 / t = 2  040 t CO 2 
Total: 17 430t CO 2 
 
7.2.2.2 Example 2 – EAF and conversion to iron or steel products  
The following example shows how specific embedded emissions are derived for crude 
steel and iron or steel products, produced by the EAF route. The  resulting embedded 
emissions of imports into the EU are then calculated  at the end of the example for reporti ng 
in the transitional period . 
185 In this example for the EAF steel making route, the installation produces products  falling 
under two aggregated goods categories , each of which is defined as a single production 
process.  
Figure 7-8 gives an outline view of the installation and shows the system boundaries as a 
red hatched line for each production process. The physical units carrying out each 
production process have been gr ouped under ‘Steel making EAF & AOD’, and under 
forming as ‘Cutting and welding’, ‘hot rolling to sheets, to bars and annealing’; and 
relevant inputs and outputs have been identified for each production process. 
Note that high- alloy steels are produced in this example. Therefore, not only CN codes, 
but different alloy grades define the different goods produced. For reporting under the 
CBAM, in the transitional period the monitoring rules assume that all different alloys 
within the same aggregated goods cate gory over the whole reporting period are considered 
to have the same embedded emissions, i.e. a weighted average of alloy grades is used in order to keep monitoring rules reasonably simple. However, the alloy grade (the content of alloying elements Cr, Mn and Ni, as well as the carbon content) has to be reported as additional information upon import. Therefore, the importer will have to report each CN code/alloy grade pair separately.  
Figure 7- 8: Example installation producing h igh-alloy steel from EAF route – Overview  
 
 
 
The two relevant production processes defined above, and elaborated further in the 
diagrams below are:  
• Production process 1 – crude steel produced by the EAF/AOD steel making route 
as slabs, of different alloy grades. The system boundaries of this product ion process 
have been defined as including inputs of steel scrap from production process 2 (steel that is cut off during the production of pipes) , precursors crude steel and 
alloys, fuels (natural gas), graphite electrodes and other additives and electrical 
energy. The crude steel output from the process is both sold and is a relevant precursor for production process 2. Due to the sale of precursor, the bubble 
approach is not allowed for this example installation. 

186 • Production process 2 – iron or steel produc ts, of different alloy grades, produced 
by different forming processes giving basic products such as tubes (cutting, rolling 
and welding), bars and rods (hot rolling and annealing) and sheets . The system 
boundaries of this production process have been defi ned as including inputs of 
crude steel (which has embedded emissions), fuels (natural gas) and electrical energy. Outputs from the production process are finished iron or steel products that 
are sold.  
The second diagram ( Figure 7-9) identifies the different source streams as inputs into the 
production processes, giving rise to direct emissions.  
Figure 7-9: Example installation producing h igh-alloy steel from EAF route – source streams 
relevant for d irect emissions monitoring with a calculation based approach  
 
 
 
Direct emissions arise from the combustion of fuels (natural gas) and from process 
emissions from graphite electrodes, other additives and from releases of carbon contained within the different iron and steel materials.  
The third diagram ( Figure 7- 10) shows indirect emissions resulting from the consumption 
of electricity consumed by production processes 1 and 2. 

187 Figure 7-10 : Example installation producing high- alloy steel from EAF route – Electricity 
consumption for i ndirect emissions  monitoring. 
 
  
 
The fourth  diagram (Figure 7-11) , provides a  complete monitoring approach for all source 
streams,  for the example installation.  
Figure 7-11 : Example installation producing high -alloy steel via the EAF route – complete 
monitoring approach. All information in red font needs monitoring. 
 
  
 In iron and steel e xample 1  (section 7.2.2.1) , a ‘bubble’ approach was  used, as all 
precursors produced by the installation are wholly used in the production of the finished 
iron and steel goods. However, this approach is not available to the operator in this example, as some of the crude stainless -steel precursor produced by production process  1 

188 is diverted and is sold before it reaches production pr ocess 2.  Therefore, specific embedded 
emissions have to be separately derived for each production process  at this installation.  
The inputs and outputs highlighted in red text in Table 7-11 are the parameters that should  
be monitored by the operator in order to attribute emissions and determine direct and 
indirect specific embedded emissions for both processes. Monitoring encompasses both aspects, quantitative (activity data, see section 6.5.1.3) and qualitative (calculation factors, see section 6.5.1.4). In case of purchased precursors it includes the specific embedded emissions, see section 6.8.2).  
Like in example 1, given the complexity of the installation and different source streams and material flows, the mass balance method is used to give a complete balance of the amount of carbon entering and leaving th e installation.  In applying this method, the CO
2 
quantities relevant for each source stream are calculated based on the carbon content (CC) in each material, without distinguishing fuels and process materials. Non- emitted carbon 
leaving the installation in products instead of being emitted is also taken into account by 
defining output source streams, which have negative activity data, highlighted in red text in Table 7- 11. 
Table 7 -11: EAF installation, example c onsumption levels – mass balance method  
Consumption 
levels  AD (t)  CC EF NCV 
(GJ/t) Emissions 
(tCO 2) 133 Assumptions / comments  
Steel scrap (market)  1 345 000  0,08%    3 942,5  Converted to CO 2 
Natural gas  163 806   56,1 48 441 096.9  IPCC values; EF as t 
CO 2 / TJ 
Graphite electrodes  4 468  81,9%    13 407,6  IPCC values  
Various additives  89 360   0,45  40 212,0  Limestone, others omitted; EF [tCO
2/t] 
Crude steel (purchased)  80 540  0,15%    442,6   
FeNi (28% Ni)  346 773  1,5%    19 058,6   
FeCr (52% Cr)  331 213  5,2%    63 105,4   
FeMn (31% Mn)  60 595  2,8%    6 216,6   
Sum      587 482,3   
Carbon in outputs  AD CC   Emissions 
(negative)   
Steel  -2 140 000 0,180%    -14 114  Steel AL is net of scrap
134 
Slags  -107 232  0,030%    -118  
Sum      -14 232   
Total direct emissions of the installation    573 251  t CO 2 / year  
Indirect emissions  MWh  EF (tCO 2 / MWh)  Emiss. t CO 2  
Total electricity consumption  1 888 460  0,833  1 573 087  t CO 2 / year  
 
 
133  Factor 3,664 t CO 2 / t carbon  
134  i.e. after deduction of scrap amounts  
189 In Table 7-11, the carbon content (CC) of different input and output source streams is 
converted to the CO 2 equivalent  and total direct emissions, net of carbon contained in the 
outputs  (steel and slag from the process)  is calculated . 
Total indirect emissions have  also been calculated in the same table.  
The next Table 7-12 summarises firstly the activity levels of the two production processes. 
Secondly, it shows  how natural gas  and electricity energy and emissions are  attributed to 
process es 2 . Energy and emissions data are calculated using  the specific energy 
consumption (SEC) values for bars, sheets and pipes . The balance of direct emissions are 
then attributed to production process 1, in the lower part of the table . 
Table 7-12: EAF installation, example c alculation of embedded emissions  by production process  
and product  (Note: SEC = Specific energy consumption)  
Production levels  Tonnes  EAF/AOD and (Hot) rolling energy 
consumption  Comment  
  Natural gas GJ / t  Electricity kWh / t   
Slabs  2 234 000  0,31 700 Process 1  – tonnes produced, 
EAF  
Slabs to market  1 007 000     
Bars to market  456 000  5,4 180 Process 2  – SEC values used to 
attribute energy and emissions.  
Sheets  771 000  4,45 220 Process 2  – SEC values used to 
attribute energy and emissions.  
Sheets to market  221 000     
Sheets to pipes  550 000     
Pipes  456 000  2,8 160 Process 2  – SEC values used to 
attribute energy and emissions.  
Scrap (internal 
recycling)  94 000    Scrap from sheet to pipe conversion (cut-off steel) . 
Split of emissions  Direct Emissions 
(t CO 2) Elec.  consumed 
(MWh)  Indirect Emissions (t CO 2) 
Process 1 (EAF / AOD)  171 005  1 563 800 1 302 645  
Process 2 (rolling etc.)  402 245  324 660  270 442  
Total  573 251  1 888 460  1 573 087  
 
No embedded emissions are attributed to steel scrap from production process 2, which is 
recycled internally  to process 1 . 
Using the data on the allocation of attributed emissions between  the two production 
processes , in Table 7-12, specific embedded emissions are then cal culated for each CBAM 
product in the following two tables, for both direct and indirect emissions. At this stage, 
the embedded emissions of precursors (purchased steel and alloys in process  1, crude steel 
in process 2)  have to be added. 
Table 7-13 calculates  direct and indirect specific embedded emissions for crude steel slabs. 
Data used in these calculations are:  
• Emissions at the installation for process 1 – determined above . 
190 • Embedded emissions of precursors consumed by process 1 - calculated below, for 
precursors crude steel and alloys purchased.  
• The Activity Level for crude steel slabs in the reporting period. The activity  level 
is the sum of sold slabs and slabs used in process 2. 
Table 7-13: EAF installation, example c alculation of total e mbedded emission – Process 1 (Crude 
steel / slabs)  
Precursors  SEE 
dir MWh  / 
t SEE 
indir  Consump
tion (t) direct em. 
(t CO 2) MWh  indirect  
(t CO 2) Total  
t CO 2 
Crude steel  1,48 0,245 0,204 80 540 119 199 19 724 16 430  
FeNi (28% 
Ni) 3,00 3,001 2,5 346 773 1 040 319 1 040 735 866 933  
FeCr (52% 
Cr) 2,5 2,821 2,35 331 213 828 034 934 396 778 352  
FeMn 
(31% Mn)  1,3 2,281 1,9 60 595 78 774 138 212 115 131  
Calculation of Total Embedded Emissions of Slabs (process 1)  
Activity Level for process 1 (slabs)  2 234 000      
Emissions at installation   171 005  1 563 800  1 302 645   
Embedded emissions of precursors consumed 
(from totals above)   2 066 325  2 133 067  1 776 845   
Total embedded emissions   2 237 331  3 696 867  3 079 490  5 316 821  
Specific embedded emissions (t CO 2 / t slab) or MWh / t  1,001  1,655  1,378  2,380  
 
The calculation for process 2 could be done in a similar way as for process 1. However, 
for the sake of guidance, Table 7-14 presents the calculation of direct and indirect specific 
embedded emissions for complex goods ( iron or steel products ) by way of using only 
specific embedded emissions and specific attributed emissions of the 2nd process, i.e. by 
omitting the activity level and total emissions of the 2nd production process.  
Table 7-14: EAF installation, example calculation of e mbedded emissions of complex goods. 
Process 2 – steel products  
Total tonnes produced:  
Bars to market  456 000  t    
Sheets to market  221 000  t    
Pipes  456 000  t    
Total steel products  1 133 000  t    
Consumption precursor (slabs)  1 227 000  t    
Mass slabs (crude steel) consumed per t:  1,083  t / t    
  Direct  
(t CO 2) MWh  Indirect  
(t CO 2) Total  
(t CO 2) 
Mass ratio (M i) precursor  1,083      
SEE i of precursor   1,001  1,655  1,378   
Emissions per tonne product process 2  0,355  0,287  0,239   
Specific embedded emissions SEE  
(t CO 2 / t steel product)   1,440  2,079  1,732  3,171  
191  
When calculating the total embedded emissions of final steel products in process 2 above, 
the mass ratio ( Mi) of the precursor is taken account  (see section  6.2.2.3 for details of the 
calculation approach) . This is the mass of crude steel slabs consumed per tonne of steel 
products  produced, and is calculated as:  
• Mass slabs / mass steel products: 1 227 000 / 1 133 000 = 1,083 (as above).  The 
direct and indirect SEE i values of the precursor are then adjusted by this ratio i.e.:  
• For SEE i direct (precursor): 1,001 x 1,083 = 1,084. 
Total direct and indirect specific embedded emissions of the complex steel product are then calculated, as above.  
Using the above approach, the CBAM reporting obligation for the import of crude steel slabs and other steel products  into the EU during the transitional period may then be 
determined; for example, for the import of 100 tonnes of product e.g. steel pipe:   
• Transitional period (report  only):  
o Direct embedded emissions = 100 x 1,440 = 144 t CO
2 
o Indirect embedded emissions = 100 x xx = 173,2 t CO 2 
Total: 317,2 t CO 2 
 
7.3 Fertili zers sector  
The textbox below signposts sector -specific sections in the Implementing Regulation, 
relevant for the CBAM transitional period .  
Implementing Regulation  references:  
• Annex II, Section 3 – Special provisions and emissions monitoring 
requirements by production route . Sub- sections 3.7 to 3.10 (fertilizer sector 
aggregated goods categories)  
• Annex IV , Section 2 – Sector specific parameters for CBAM goods that 
should be reported by producers of goods to importers, in the Emissions Data Communication.  
• Annex III: Section B.6 Requirements for a measurement -based methodology 
for CO 2 and N 2O. Section B.8. Requirements for CO 2 transfers between 
installations.  Section B.9.3 Additional rules for determining emissions from 
nitric acid production, covering: B.9.3.1 General rules for m easurement -of 
N2O emissions; B.9.3.2 Determination of flue gas flow; B.9.3.3 Oxygen 
concentrations.  
 
192 7.3.1 Sector -specific requirements  for monitoring and reporting  
Direct and indirect embedded emissions should be monitored in line with the methodology 
set out in the Implementing Regulation and outlined in section 6 of this guidance 
document .  
7.3.1.1 Emissions monitoring  
Relevant emissions that should be monitored and reported for the fertilizer s sector are:  
• Carbon dioxide emissions (direct) from the fuel combustion process, from 
stationary plant only (excludes emissions from any mobile plant such as vehicles). 
• Carbon dioxide and nitrous oxide (N 2O) emissions (direct) from the process, in 
particular :  
o N2O emissions from the catalytic oxidation of ammonia and/or from the 
NO X/N2O abatement units  (but not from combustion); and  
o Under certain conditions CO 2 transferred from the production process for 
ammonia to other installations  (see section 6.5.6.2) . 
• Carbon dioxide emissions (direct) resulting from the production of measurable heating (e.g. steam) and cooling that is consumed within the system boundaries of 
the production process, regardless of the location of the production of the heat (i.e. from on -site generation or from imports from off -site).  
• Carbon dioxide emissions (direct) resulting from emissions control (e.g. from carbonate raw materials such as soda ash used for acidic flue gas cleaning). This is included for any good where this is applicable.  
Direct emissions from the different source streams above are not reported separately but 
are added together to result in the total direct emissions for the installation or production process.  
Indirect emissions from electricity consumed must be reported separately from direct emissions.  
Note that other N
2O emissions resulting from the combust ion of fuels are  excluded from 
the system boundaries . 
 
7.3.1.2 Additional rules  
Attribution of emissions for mixed fertilizers  
For installations producing different grades of mixed fertilizer , emissions for direct and 
indirect emissions are attributed separately , from embedded emissions consumed by the 
production process as follows:  
• Direct and indirect emissions : 
o Are calculated  for the whole reporting period.  
193 
Simplified!  o Are attributed to each fertilizer  grade on a pro- rata basis per tonne of final 
product  produced.  
• Determining e mbedded emissions : 
o Are calculated separately for each fertilizer  grade, taking into account the 
relevant mass of each precursor used in the manufacture of  each grade.  
o For each p recursor , the embedded emissions are the average for that 
precursor over the reporting period.  
However, given the complexity of production processes in the fertilizer  sector , during the 
transitional period  installations producing mixed fertilizer s may simplify the monitoring 
of the respective production process by determining one uniform value of embedded 
emissions per tonne of nitrogen contained in the mixed fertilizer s, irrespective of the 
chemical form of nitrogen (ammonium, nitrate or urea forms)135. 
Measurable heat produced from exothermic chemical processes  
Where an installation consumes measurable heat p roduced/recovered  from an exothermic 
chemical process other than combustion, such as in the production of ammonia or nitric acid, the amount of recovered heat consumed is determined separately from other 
measurable heat , and is assigned zero CO
2 emissions . 
Production of electricity  
If electricity is produced within the production process, a correction to the attributed emissions has to be made (see section 6.2.2.2). Where the electricity stems from processes without combustion (e.g. expansion turbines in ammonia production), the emission factor of that electricity is considered zero.  
Transfers of CO
2 between production processes  
Where CO 2 from ammonia production is captured and transferred to a geological CO 2 
storage site, the related emissions could be deducted, provided the receiving installation carries out monitoring under the CBAM or an equivalent MRV system (see section 6.5.6.2). Subject to future changes in the legislative framework of the EU ETS, which is 
taken into account for CBAM purposes, also CO
2 used as a feedstock (process input) in 
the production of products where the CO 2 is permanently chemically bound, it may be  
accounted for as subtraction in the direct embedded emissions of ammonia . However, 
under current legislation, urea does not qualify as such product, as the CO 2 is assumed to 
be emitted during its use as fertilizer. Details are given in section 6.5.6.2. 
Measurement -based approach for monitoring N 2O emissions  
Where there are N 2O emissions from the process (not from combustion) in the fertilizer  
sector, you, as an operator, must monitor these using a Continuous Emission Measurement 
System (CEMS) installed at a suitable measurement point136. Detailed guidance on the 
 
135  In mixed fertiliz er production European fertili zer legislation requires the content of N (in its different 
forms, as ammonium (NH 4+) or nitrate (NO 3–), urea or other (organic) forms) to be clearly indicated on 
the packaging or in accompanying sales documentation in case of bulk deliveries. These content values 
may be used to determine embedded emissions of any mixed fertili zer. 
136  If there are multiple emissions points that cannot be monitored from a single location, emissions from 
these various points should be separately monitored and the results combined for reporting purposes.  
194 Implementing Regulation’s requirements for CEMS is given in section 6.5.2 of this 
document. N 2O emissions are only regarded relevant for monitoring in the production of 
nitric acid. However, where nitric acid or the resulting nitrates (mixed fertilizers) are used 
as precursor, the related N 2O emissions for an integral part of the embedded emissions, 
which are expressed as t CO 2e: 
CO 2(e) [t] = N 2Oannual[t] × GWP N2O  
Where:  
N2Oannual … total annual N 2O emissions, calculated as in section 6.5.2. 
GWP N2O … Global Worming Potential of N 2O (t CO 2e / t N 2O). Please see 
Annex VIII to  the Implementing Regulation for relevant GWP values (given also 
in Annex E  of this guidance document).  
For determining the flow rate of the flue gas, the Implementing Regulation states that the 
mass balance method as mentioned in section 6.5.2 is preferred over flow measurements.  
 
7.3.1.3 Additional reporting requirements  
The following Table 7-15 lists out the additional information that should be provided by 
you as an operator to importers, in your emissions data communication to them. 
Table 7 -15: Additional fertilizer sector parameters requested in the CBAM report  
Aggregated good 
category  Reporting requirement in the quarterly report  
Ammonia137 – Concentration, if hydrous solution . 
Nitric acid138 – Concentration (mass %) . 
Urea  - Purity  (mass % urea contained, % N contained) . 
Mixed fertilizer s139,140 Content of different forms of nitrogen in mixed fertilizer : 
- Content of N as ammonium (NH 4+); 
- Content of N as nitrate (NO 3–);  
- Content of N as Urea;  
 
137  Both hydrous and anhydrous ammonia shall be reported jointly a s 100% ammonia.  
138  Amounts of nitric acid produced shall be monitored and reported as 100% nitric acid.  
139  The amounts of different nitrogen compounds contained in the final product should be recorded in 
accordance with Regulation (EU) 2019/1009 laying dow n rules on the making available on the market 
of EU fertili zing products . 
140 Regulation (EU) 2019/1009 of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down rules on the making available on the market of EU fertili zing products .  
See: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2019/1009/2023- 03-16   
195 Aggregated good 
category  Reporting requirement in the quarterly report  
- Content of N in other (organic) forms . 
 
You need to ensure that you collect all the parameters necessary for your CBAM goods 
and communicate them to the importers of your goods. The importer will need to report the additional parameters when the goods are imported to the EU under the CBAM. 
7.3.2 Worked example for the fertiliz er sector  
The following worked example shows how specific embedded emissions are derived  for a 
particular  mixed fertilizer  grade, NPK 15-15-15, produced by mixing and granulation. 
The resulting embedded emissions of imports into the EU are then calculated at the end of 
the example for reporting in the transitional period.  
Figure 7-12 gives an outline view of the installation and shows the system boundaries as a 
hatched line for the single production process. The physical units carrying out the 
production process have been grouped under ‘Granul ation with Pipe reactor’ (including an 
assumed dryer using natural gas)  and the inputs and outputs and sources of emissions have 
been identified. 
Figure 7-12: Fertilizer  example – Overview and complete monitoring approach for the  production 
of a mixed  fertilizer  grade. 
 
 
 
Inputs into the  production process are raw materials, precursor goods urea and ammonia 
(anhydrous), and electrical energy. Outputs are mixed fertiliz er product. Production process 1CO2
Drum granulation 
with Pipe reactorNPK 15 -15-15
CN: 3105 20 10Phosphoric AcidAmmonia
(anhydrous)
CN: 2814Urea
CN: 3102 10
Sulphuric Acid
SSP*
KCl
Electricity
*SSP: Single Super PhosphatePurchased precursors
Natural gas

196 The inputs and outputs highlighted in red text above are the parameters that would need to 
be monitored by the operator in order to attribute emissions and determine direct and indirect specific embedded emissions for both production processes.  
The direct and indirect emissions that are monitored in this example result from: 
• Direct emissions from natural gas used in the dryer. 
• Indirect emissions from the electrical energy consumed by the production process.  
The inputs of precursors (with embedded emissions) and the activity level of the mixed fertilizer  goods produced also need to be monitored. 
Note that a single mixed fertilizer  production process can make a wide range of different 
fertilizer  grades (or formulations) using different quantities of precursor. Therefore, the 
specific embedded emissions for each fertilizer  grade have to be determined separately 
from other grades that may also be produced at the same installation over the course of the same reporting period.  
This is achieved by using:  
• The relevant mass of each precursor used in each mixed fertilizer  grade; and  
• The specific embedded emissions of the precursors used to make a given mixed 
fertilizer  grade.  
• Assuming that the granulation and drying process is similar for all produced fertilizer grades, the direct and indirect emissions of the production process can be monitored over the full reporting period and then divided by the total activity level of the process, i.e. the total amount of all fertilizers produced in the reporting period. This gives a value of energy per tonne of fertilizer as used in the calculation in Table 7- 16. 
Table 7-16 sets out the process by which total direct and indirect specific embedded 
emissions for mixed fertilizer  product NPK 15 -15-15, are determined.   
 
Table 7-16: Example c alculation of total direct and indirect specific embedded emissions for NPK 
mixed fertilizer . 
Inputs  Input mass  Precursor embedded 
emissions (t CO 2/t)  Embedded emissions (t 
CO 2/t) 
 (kg / t)  direct  indirect  direct  indirect  
KCl 251,3  n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. 
SSP141 17% P2O5 200,0 n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. 
Phosphoric acid (40% P 2O5) 300,0 n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. 
Sulphuric acid (96 wt-%) 116,0  n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. 
NH 3 93,0 1,900  0,208  0,177  0,019  
Urea  160,0  0,719  0,178  0,115  0,028  
 
141  Single Super Phosphate  
197 Energy needed for granulation  
(average of reporting period)     0,018  0,006  
Total SEE for mixed fertilizer 
product NPK 15 -15-15    0,310  0,054  
Total direct and indirect specific embedded emissions for the mixed fertilizer  product are 
calculated by combining the SEE values for relevant precursors and for energy needed for 
granulation, per tonne product, as above (see section 6.2.2.3 for details of the calculation 
approach).  
Relevant precursor goods above are NH 3 and Urea. In order to determine the total 
embedded emissions of the mixed fertilizer  product, the amount (kg) of each precursor 
used per tonne of mixed fertilizer  product is taken into account, e.g. for urea  the t otal 
input mass of precursor per tonne of product  is 160 kg:  
• Urea d irect embedded emissions: 0,160 t / t x 0,719 t CO 2 / t = 0,115 t  CO 2 / t 
mixed fertilizer  product . 
• Urea i ndirect embedded emissions: 0,160 t / t x 0,178 t CO 2 / t = 0,028 t  CO 2 / t 
mixed fertilizer  product . 
Direct and indirect emissions arising from the mixing and granulation production process 
must also be included, as is done in Table 7- 16 above per tonne of product.  
Other chemical raw material inputs (KCl, SSP, Phosphoric and Sulphuric acids) do not 
have embedded emi ssions and do not need to be taken into account . 
Using the above approach, the CBAM reporting obligation due for the import of mixed 
fertilizer  product into the EU during the transitional period may then be determined; for 
example, for the import of 100 tonnes of NPK 15- 15-15 product:  
• Transitional period (report only):  
o Direct embedded emissions = 100 t x 0,310 t CO 2 / t = 31 t CO 2 
o Indirect embedded emissions = 100 t x 0,054 t CO 2 / t = 5,4 t CO 2 
Total: 36,4 t CO 2 
 
7.4 Aluminium sector 
The textbox below signposts the sector -specific sections in the Implementing Regulation , 
relevant  for the CBAM transitional period .  
Implementing Regulation  references:  
• Annex II, Section 3 – Special provisions and emissions monitoring 
requirements by produ ction route.  Sub- sections 3.17 to 3.18 (aluminium sector 
aggregated goods categories). 
• Annex III, Section A  – Principles , sub- section A. 4. Approach to dividing 
installations into production processes, sub- section (d);  
198 • Annex III, Section B – Monitoring of direct emissions at installation level, 
sub-section B.7. Requirements for determining perfluorocarbon emissions, 
covering: B.7.1 Calculation method A – Slope Method; B.7.2 Calculation 
method B – Overvoltage Method; B.7.3 Rule fo r calculating CO 2e emissions 
from PFC emissions using GWP values.  
• Annex IV , Section 2 – Sector specific parameters for CBAM goods that 
should be reported by producers of goods to importers, in the Emissions Data 
Communication.  
• Annex V III, Section 3 – Table of GWP  for perfluorocarbons . 
 
7.4.1 Sector -specific requirements  for monitoring and reporting  
Direct and indirect embedded emissions should be monitored in line with the methodology 
set out in the Implementing Regulation and outlined in section 6 of this guidance 
document .  
7.4.1.1 Emissions monitoring  
Relevant emissions that should be monitored and reported for the al uminium sector are: 
• Carbon dioxide emissions (direct) resulting from the consumption of pre -baked 
carbon anodes or green anode paste during elect rolysis – emissions result from the 
reaction of the carbon electrode with oxygen from the alumina or from other sources of oxygen s uch as from air
142. There are also emissions associated with the 
self-baking (coking) of green anode paste in situ in the Søderberg process.  
• Carbon dioxide emissions (direct) resulting from furnaces (e.g. holding, pre -
heating, re -melting and annealing), whe re heated by the combustion of fuels used 
for the furnaces, from stationary plant only (excludes emissions from any mobile units such as vehicles).  
• Carbon dioxide emissions (direct) resulting from the production of measurable heating (e.g. steam) and cooli ng, that is consumed within the system boundaries of 
the production process, regardless of the location of the production of the heating and cooling (i.e. from on -site generation or from imports from off -site).  
• PFC emissions (direct) for CF
4 and C 2F6 only, formed during brief upset conditions 
known as the ‘Anode Effect’, when alumina levels drop too low and the electrolytic 
bath itself undergoes electrolysis.  
• Carbon dioxide emissions (direct) resulting from emissions control (e.g. from carbonate raw materi als such as soda ash used for acidic flue gas cleaning).  
Note that emissions related to the production of pre -baked carbon anodes (even if produced 
on the same site) and alumina are excluded from the system boundary.  
 
142  All formed carbon monoxide (CO) is assumed to be converted to CO2.  
199 
Simplified!  Direct emissions from the different so urce streams above are not reported separately but 
are added together to result in the total direct emissions for the installation or production 
process.  
Indirect emissions from electricity consumed must be reported separately from direct emissions. Note t hat for this sector indirect emissions are only reported during the 
transitional period (and not during the definitive period).  
 
7.4.1.2 Additional rules  
Attribution of emissions  
Given the complexity of production processes  in the aluminium sector , during the 
transitional period  installations producing two or more goods from the aggregated goods 
categories ‘ unwrought aluminium ’ or ‘aluminium products ’, may be monitor ed and 
report ed defining one joint production process for all the products from these groups 
covered , provided no intermediate product (i.e. precursor to one of the processes) is sold 
or otherwise transferred out of the installation. 
Determining process emissions  
Additional rules also apply f or determining PFC emissions (CF
4 and C 2F6 only) from 
primary aluminium production. However, where primary aluminium is used as a precursor, 
the related PFC emissions form part of the embedded emissions of the final product. 
Two different calculation -based  methods are available in accordance with Implementing 
Regulation, Annex III, section B.7. Both methods are  considered equivalent, but as  each 
requires different data , you should choose the method that  is most appropriate for  your 
installation’s process control equipment:   
• ‘Slope method’  (Method A ) – w here the ‘ anode effect minutes per cell -day’ 
(AEM) are recor ded. The AEM expresses the frequency of anode effects (number 
of anode effects /  cell-day) multiplied by the average duration of anode effects 
(anode effect minutes / occurrence) . 
• ‘Overvoltage method’  (Method B) – w here the ‘ anode effect overvoltage ’ 
(AEO) per cell [mV] is recorded . The AEO is determined as the integral of (time 
× voltage above the target voltage) divided by the time (duration) of data 
collection.  
 
Calculation Method A – Slope Method  
The following equations for determining PFC emissions shall be used under method A:  
CF 4 emissions [t] = AEM × (SEF CF4/1 000) × Pr Al  
C2F6 emissions [t] = CF 4 emissions × F C2F6 
Where:  
AEM  is the anode effect minutes / cell -day;  
200 SEF CF4 is the slope emission factor expressed in (kg CF 4 / t Al pro duced) / (anode effect 
minutes / cell- day)]. Where different cell -types are used, different SEF may be applied as 
appropriate;  
PrAl is the production of primary aluminium [t] during the reporting period, and 
FC2F6 is the weight fraction of C 2F6 [t C 2F6 / t CF 4]. 
The anode effect minutes per cell -day expresses the frequency of anode effects (number 
anode effects / cell -day) multiplied by the average duration of anode effects (anode effect 
minutes / occurrence):  
AEM = frequency × average duration  
Emission factor: The emission factor for CF 4 (slope emission factor, SEF CF4) expresses the 
amount [kg] of CF 4 emitted per tonne of aluminium produced per anode effect minute per 
cell-day. The emission factor (weight fraction F C2F6) of C 2F6 expresses the amount [kg] of 
C2F6 emitted proportionate to the amount [kg] of CF 4 emitted.  
Table 7-17: Technology -specific emission factors related to activity data for the slope 
method. 
Technology  Emission factor for CF 4 
(SEF CF4) 
[(kg CF 4/t Al) / (AE -
min/cell- day)]  Emission factor for C 2F6 
(FC2F6) 
[t C 2F6/ t CF 4] 
Legacy Point Feed Pre Bake (PFPB L)  0,122  0,097  
Modern Point Feed Pre Bake (PFPB M)  0,104  0,057  
Modern Point -Fed Prebake without fully 
automated anode effect intervention 
strategies for PFC emissions (PFPB 
MW)  – (*) – (*) 
Centre Worked Prebake (CWPB)  0,143  0,121  
Side Worked Prebake (SWPB)  0,233  0,280  
Vertical Stud Søderberg (VSS)  0,058  0,086  
Horizontal Stud Søderberg (HSS)  0,165  0,077  
(*) The installation has to  determine the factor by own measurements. If this is technically not feasible or 
involves unreasonable costs, the values for CWPB methodology shall be used.  
 
Calculation Method B – Overvoltage Method  
For the overvoltage method, the following equations shall be used:  
CF 4 emissions [t] = OVC × (AEO/CE) × Pr Al × 0,001 
C2F6 emissions [t] = CF 4 emissions × F C2F6 
Where:  
OVC  is the overvoltage coefficient (‘emission factor’) expressed in kg CF 4 per tonne of 
aluminium produced per mV overvoltage;  
201 AEO  is the anode effect overvoltage per cell [mV] determined as the integral of (time × 
voltage above the target voltage) divided by the time (duration) of data collection; 
CE is the average current efficiency of aluminium production [%];  
PrAl is the annual production of primary aluminium [t], and  
FC2F6 is the weight fraction of C 2F6 [t C 2F6 / t CF 4]. 
the term AEO/CE (Anode effect over voltage / current efficiency) expresses the time-
integrated average anode effect overvoltage [mV overvoltage] per average current 
efficiency [%].  
Table 7 -18: Technology -specific emission factors related to ove rvoltage activity data.  
Technology Emission factor for CF 4 
[(kg CF 4/t Al) / mV]  Emission factor for C 2F6 
[t C 2F6/ t CF 4] 
Centre Worked Prebake (CWPB)  1,16  0,121  
Side Worked Prebake (SWPB)  3,65 0,252  
 
• Minimum requirement  for both methods : Technology- specific emission factors 
given in the Implementing Regulation, Annex III, section B.7 are used.  
• Recommended improvement:  Installation -specific emission factors for CF 4 and 
C2F6 are established through continuous or intermitt ent field measurements  at 
least every 3 years or after significant changes in the installation , taking into 
account industry best practice guidelines143. 
 
Calculating CO 2(e) emissions from PFC emissions 
The following formula may be used to calculate CO 2(e) from CF 4 and C 2F6 emissions, 
using the global warming potential (GWP) for these gases:  
 PFC emissions [t CO 2(e)] = CF 4 emissions [t] × GWP CF4 + C 2F6 emissions [t] × GWP C2F6 
 Please see Annex VIII to  the Implementing Regulation for relevant GWP values (given 
also in Annex E  of this guidance document).  
Furthermore, fugitive emissions of PFC are taken into account calculated from the 
emissions measurable in a duct or stack (‘point source emissions’) using the collection 
efficiency of the duct:  
PFC emissions (total) = PFC emissions (duct) / collection efficiency   
The collection efficiency shall be measured when the installation -specific emission factors 
are determined.  
 
 
143 For example, the Inter national Aluminium Institute  best practice guidelines . 
202 7.4.1.3 Additional reporting requirements  
The following Table 7-19 lists out the additional information that should be provided by 
you as an operator to importers, in your emissions data communication to them. 
Table 7 -19: Additional aluminium sector parameters requested in the CBAM report  
Aggregated good 
category  Reporting requirement in the quarterly report  
Unwrought aluminium  – Tonnes of scrap used for producing one tonne  of the 
unwrought aluminium product . 
– % of scrap that is pre -consumer scrap.  
– Content of alloys in aluminium: If the total content of 
elements other than aluminium exceeds 1%, the total percentage of such elements . 
Aluminium products  – Tonnes of scrap used for producing one tonne of the 
unwrought aluminium product. 
– % of scrap that is pre -consumer scrap.  
– Content of alloys in aluminium: If the total content of elements other than aluminium exceeds 1%, the total percentage of such elements.  
 
These parameters depend on the goods produced. Alloying elements play a minor role and 
are not reflected in the CN classification of aluminium goods. However, where the product 
contains more than  5% alloying elements , you should calculate the embedded emissions 
of the product as if the mass of alloying elements were unwrought aluminium from 
primary smelting . 
You need to ensure that you collect all the parameters necessary for your CBAM goods and communicate them to the importers of your goods. The importer will need to report the additional parameters w hen the goods are imported to the EU under the CBAM. 
 
7.4.2 Worked example for the aluminium sector  
The following worked example shows how specific embedded emissions are derived  for 
aluminium sector goods . The resulting embedded emissions of imports into the EU are 
then calculated  at the end of the example for reporting in the transitional period. In this 
example the installation produces products  from two aggregated goods categories , 
unwrought aluminium and aluminium products, each of which is defined as a single 
production process, as the intermediate product is sold . Therefore,  a ‘bubble approach’ is 
not possible .  
Figure 7-13 gives an outline view of the installation and shows the system boundaries as a 
hatched line for each production process. The physical units carrying out each production 
203 process have been grouped under ‘Primary smelting’ and ‘Forming steps’ and t he different 
inputs and outputs and sources of emissions have been identified for each production 
process.  
Figure 7- 13: Aluminium example – o verview  
 
 
 
The two production processes defined above are: 
• Production process 1 – primary smelting process route producing unwrought 
aluminium as ingots (which may be sold) and slabs , which are transferred to 
production process 2. Raw material inputs are anodes, both manufactured on site 
and purchased from elsewhere, and alumina .  
• Production process 2 – different forming processes producing a range of aluminium 
products , such as wire, sheets and foils. Raw material i nputs  are unwrought 
aluminium slabs transferred from  production process 1. There is also scrap from 
this process. This is sent off -site for recycling.  
The second diagram ( Figure 7-14) identifies sources of direct emissions from the 
installation . 

204 Figure 7-14: Aluminium example – Identification of source streams for monitoring of direct 
emissions  
 
Direct emissions above result from fuel combustion in both production processes, and from 
the primary smelting process -  from the consumption of carbon anodes and from the 
formation of PFCs.  
Note that on- site anode production is  ignored, as anodes are raw materials and are therefore 
conside red to have zero embedded emissions. For monitoring the anode consumption, the 
difference of anode input and anode stumps recycled result in the activity data of anode 
consumption.  
However, for completeness you may wish on a voluntary basis to fully monit or all sources 
of direct and indirect emissions , which in this case would include a full mass balance of 
raw materials and additional fuels consumed in the anode production. Alumina 
consumption does not need monitoring, as it neither contributes to the dir ect emissions nor 
to embedded emissions. The third diagram ( Figure 7- 15) shows indirect emissions resulting  from the consumption 
of electricity consumed by production processes  1 and 2. 
  
 

205 Figure 7- 15: Aluminium example - Indirect emissions monitoring (electricity consumption)  
 
 
 
The fourth diagram ( Figure 7-16) provides a complete monitoring approach for all source 
streams, for the example installation.  
 
Figure 7- 16: Aluminium example – complete monitoring approach 
 
  
 The inputs and outputs highlighted in red text in Figure 7-16  are the parameters that would 
need to be monitored by the operator in order to attribute emissions and determine direct 
and indirect specific embedded emissions for both production processes.  
The direct and indirect emissions that are monitored in this example result from: 
Anode 
production
Primary 
smeltingPurchased
anodes
AluminaOwn anodes
Liquid Al
Installation 
boundaries
Ingots
CN 7601 10 Production process 1 Production process 2Voluntary monitoring
SlabsForming 
steps:
Rolling
Etc.Aluminium 
products
•Wire 
CN 7605 nnnn
•Sheets 
CN 7606 nnnn
•Foils 
CN 7607 nnnn
•…
•…CO2,
PFCsCO2
CO2Electricity
Anode stumpsNatural gas
Mi(mass used 
per t aluproduct)
Scrap

206 • Direct CO 2 emissions from fuel (natural gas) combustion, and from the process 
resulting from  the consumption of carbon anodes .  
• Direct emissions of PFCs  formed during the electrolysis process .  
• Indirect emissions from the electrical energy consumed by the production process.  
• In the case of production process 2, e mbedded emissions in precursors  (the slabs 
produced in process 1) . 
The inputs of precursors (with embedded emissions) and the activity level of the 
aluminium goods produced by each production process also need to be monitored. 
Table 7-20 summarise s the inputs and outputs from the two production processes that are 
monitored in order to determine total direct and indirect specific embedded emissions.  
Table 7 -20: Input & production levels of the aluminium example  
Production:  Ingots & liquid aluminium, total  200 000 t 
 Ingots (sale):  80 000 t 
 Primary aluminium into process 2  (slabs)  120 000 t 
 Aluminium products (process 2)   
 Wire (CN 7605)  45 000 t 
 Sheets (CN 7606 ) 60 000 t 
 Foils (CN 7607)  8 000 t 
 Total Aluminium products (process 2)  113 000 t 
 Scrap144 sold 7 000 t 
Inputs:  Alumina  380 000 t 
 Electrodes  (sum self -produced and purchased, minus stumps)  69 000 t 
 Natural gas   (12 219 t for process 1, 1 962 t for process 2)  14 18 1 t 
 Whilst some unwrought aluminium is sold off site in the form of ingots (80 000 tonnes), 
120 000 tonnes is used as a precursor in production process 2, and there is scrap of 7 000 tonnes at the end. No emissions are attributed to alumi nium scrap, which as scrap has zero 
embedded emissions.  
Table 7-21 summarise s the calculation of  direct emissions  and their attribution to each 
production process. Table 7-22 provides the corresponding calculation for indirect 
emissions.
 
  
 
144  Not a CBAM good 
207  
Table 7 -21: Aluminium example – Installation's total direct emissions  
Direct emissions CO 2e Emissions  Units 
From electrodes  (using factor 3,664 t CO 2 / t C) :  252 816  t CO 2 
From natural gas  (NCV = 48 GJ/t, EF=56,1 t CO 2 / TJ):  32 902  t CO 2 
From PFCs  (using a method described in section 7.4.1.2 ) 25 282  t CO 2e 
Total Process 1 (primary aluminium)  311 000  t CO 2e 
Total process 2 (final aluminium products) , emissions from natural gas  5 283  t CO 2 
Total direct emissions  of the installation  316 283  t CO 2 
 
Table 7 -22: Aluminium example – Installation's total indirect emissions  
Indirect emissions  Electricity consumed  
(MWh ) EF (t CO 2 / MWh)  Emissions (t CO 2) 
Process 1 (primary)  3 000 000  0,410 (145) 1 230 000  
Process 2 (final products)  105 000  0,410  43 050  
Total indirect emissions    1 273 050  
 
Using the data in the tables  above, direct and indirect specific embedded emissions  are 
then calculated separately for each aggregated goods category as shown in Table 7- 23. 
Table 7-23: Example calculation of  specific  embedded emissions of complex final aluminium goods  
 Production levels  (t) Process total em issions  
(t CO 2e) Mass ratio 
(M i) of 
precursor 
(t / t) SEE dir.  
(t CO 2e / 
t) SEE 
indir.  (t 
CO 2e / t)  
Process 1 ( unwrought aluminium – ingots and slabs ) 
 Product   Direct  Indirect   Direct  Indirect  
 Ingots  80 000      
 Slabs  120 000      
 Total  200 000 311 000 1 230 000  1,555 6,150 
Process 2 (final aluminium products)  
Precursor  Slabs  120 000   1,062 1,651  6,531  
Aluminium  
products   113 000 5 283 43 050  0,047 0,381 
Total embedded emissions of final a luminium products    1,698 6,912 
 
When calculating the total embedded emissions of final aluminium products above, the 
mass ratio ( Mi) of the precursor is taken account  (for calculation rules see section  6.2.2.3) . 
 
145  The emission factor is based on a fictitious country’s electricity grid with 40% electricity from relatively 
old coal plants, and 60% hydropower. Note that hydropower can only be taken into account if a power 
purchase agreement exists between the installation and the producer of the electricity. Otherwise a default value provided by the Commission would have to be used.  
208 This is the mass of unwrought aluminium slabs consumed per tonne of aluminium 
products, and is calculated as:  
• Mass slabs / mass aluminium products: 120 000 t / 113 000 t = 1,062 t / t (as above).  
The direct and indirect SEE i values of  the precursor  are then adjusted by this ratio i.e.:   
• For SEE i direct  (precursor):  1,555 t CO 2 / t x 1,062 t  / t= 1,651 t CO 2 / t. 
Total direct and indirect specific embedded emissions of  the final complex aluminium 
product are calculated by adding  the SEE values of the precursor (adjusted by the M i) to 
the emissions of the production process for aluminium products, as above.  
Using the above approach, the CBAM reporting obligation due for the  import  of final 
aluminium product into the EU during the transitional  period may then be determined; for 
example, for the import of 100 tonnes of basic aluminium product e.g. sheets :  
• Transitional period  (report only):  
o Direct embedded emissions = 100 t  x 1,698 t CO 2 / t = 1 69,8 t CO 2 
o Indirect embedded emissions = 100 t  x 6,912 t CO 2 / t = 691,2 t CO 2 
Total: 861,0 t CO 2 
 
7.5 Chemicals – Hydrogen  sector  
The textbox below signposts sector -specific  sections in the Implementing Regulation, 
relevant for the CBAM transitional period.  
Implementing Regulation  references:  
• Annex II, Section 3 – Special provisions and emissions monitoring 
requirements by production route. Sub- section 3.6 (Hydrogen).  
• Annex IV , Section 2 – Sector specific parameters for CBAM goods that 
should be reported by producers of goods to importers, in the Emissions Data Communication.  
 
7.5.1 Sector -specific requirements  for monitoring and reporting  
Direct and indirect embedded emissions should be monitored in l ine with the methodology 
set out in the Implementing Regulation and outlined in section 6 of this guidance 
document .  
7.5.1.1 Emissions monitoring  
Relevant emissions that should be monitored and reported for the hydrogen sector are:  
• Carbon dioxide emissions (direct) from the fuel combustion process in the 
hydrogen or synthesis gas production process, primary and secondary steam 
209 reforming o f natural gas, or partial oxidation other hydrocarbons; from stationary 
plant only (excludes emissions from any mobile units such as vehicles).  
• Carbon dioxide emissions (direct) resulting from the production of measurable 
heating (for the purpose of producing hot water or steam) and cooling that is 
consumed within the system boundaries of the production process, regardless of the location of the production of the heat (i.e. from on- site generation or from 
imports from off- site).  
• Carbon dioxide emissions (direct) from electrolysis are minimal and so where these emissions are significant they are likely to result from ancillary plant.  
• Carbon dioxide emissions (direct) resulting from emissions control (e.g. from carbonate raw materials such as soda ash us ed for acidic flue gas cleaning).  
Direct emissions from the different source streams above are not reported separately but 
are added together to result in the total direct emissions for the installation or production 
process.  
Indirect emissions from electricity consumed must be reported separately from direct emissions. Note that for this sector indirect emissions are only reported during the transitional period (and not during the definitive period).  
 
7.5.1.2 Additional rules  
Attribution of emissions where differ ent products are simultaneously produced 
Additional rules apply for the attribution of direct (and where applicable indirect)  
emissions to the different products  of the following production processes , where these 
products have been produced simultaneously : 
• Electrolysis of water  – where oxygen is released  to the atmosphere , all emissions 
from the production process are attributed to the hydrogen product. However, if 
oxygen is collected and used in othe r production processes or is sold then molar 
proportions are used to attribute emissions, using the equation below.  
• Chlor -Alkali elect rolysis  and the production of chlorates  – molar proportions are 
used to attribute emissions to the hydrogen produced, using the equations  below . 
Indirect embedded emissions from electricity consumption are to be separately reported 
during the transitional period. An emission factor of zero for ele ctricity may be used where 
electricity  is certified
146 to be produced from renewable sources. Such certification is 
required for the purpose of importing “green hydrogen” under the EU’s renewable energy 
framework.  
 
 
146  In accordance with Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 202 3/1184 supplementing Directive (EU) 
2018/2001 […] by establishing a Union methodology setting out detailed rules for the production of  
renewable liquid and gaseous transport fuels of non- biological origin. See 
http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/1184/oj   
210 Electrolysis of water  
Where the co -product oxygen is collected and/or where direct or indirect emissions are not 
equal to zero, emissions from the process are attributed to hydrogen based on molar 
proportions using the following equation. 
𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝐻𝐻2=𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑒𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒�1− 𝑚𝑚𝐻𝐻2,𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑒𝑝𝑝
𝑀𝑀𝐻𝐻2
𝑚𝑚𝐻𝐻2,𝑖𝑖𝐷𝐷𝑐𝑐𝑝𝑝
𝑀𝑀𝐻𝐻2+𝑚𝑚𝐻𝐻2,𝑖𝑖𝐷𝐷𝑐𝑐𝑝𝑝
𝑀𝑀𝐻𝐻2� 
Where:  
𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝐻𝐻2 … Either direct or indirect emissions attributed to hydrogen produced over the 
reporting period, expressed in tonnes of CO 2 
𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑒𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒 … Either direct or indirect emissions of the whol e production process over the 
reporting period, expressed in tonnes of CO 2 
𝑚𝑚𝐻𝐻2,𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑒𝑝𝑝 …Mass of oxygen sold or used in the installation over the reporting period, 
expressed in tonnes  
𝑚𝑚𝐻𝐻2,𝑖𝑖𝐷𝐷𝑐𝑐𝑝𝑝 …Mass of oxygen produced over the reporting period, expressed in tonnes  
𝑚𝑚𝐻𝐻2,𝑖𝑖𝐷𝐷𝑐𝑐𝑝𝑝…Mass of hydrogen produced over the reporting period, expressed in tonnes  
𝑀𝑀𝐻𝐻2 … Molar mass of O 2 (31,998 kg/kmol)   
𝑀𝑀𝐻𝐻2 … Molar mass of H 2 (2,016 kg/kmol)  
 
Chlor -Alkali electrolysis and production of chlorates  
Where direct or indirect emissions are not equal to zero, then emissions are attributed to 
the hydrogen fraction based on molar proportions using the following equations:  
Chlor -Alkali electrolysis: 
𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝐻𝐻2,𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑒𝑝𝑝 =𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑒𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒� 𝑚𝑚𝐻𝐻2,𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑒𝑝𝑝
𝑀𝑀𝐻𝐻2
𝑚𝑚𝐻𝐻2,𝑖𝑖𝐷𝐷𝑐𝑐𝑝𝑝
𝑀𝑀𝐻𝐻2+𝑚𝑚𝑁𝑁𝑒𝑒2,𝑖𝑖𝐷𝐷𝑐𝑐𝑝𝑝
𝑀𝑀𝑁𝑁𝑒𝑒2+𝑚𝑚𝑁𝑁𝑒𝑒𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻 ,𝑖𝑖𝐷𝐷𝑐𝑐𝑝𝑝
𝑀𝑀𝑁𝑁𝑒𝑒𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻� 
Production of Sodium Chlorate:  
𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝐻𝐻2,𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑒𝑝𝑝 =𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑒𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒� 𝑚𝑚𝐻𝐻2,𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑒𝑝𝑝
𝑀𝑀𝐻𝐻2
𝑚𝑚𝐻𝐻2,𝑖𝑖𝐷𝐷𝑐𝑐𝑝𝑝
𝑀𝑀𝐻𝐻2+𝑚𝑚𝑁𝑁𝑒𝑒𝑁𝑁𝑒𝑒𝐻𝐻3,𝑖𝑖𝐷𝐷𝑐𝑐𝑝𝑝
𝑀𝑀𝑁𝑁𝑒𝑒𝑁𝑁𝑒𝑒𝐻𝐻3� 
Where:  
𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝐻𝐻2,𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑒𝑝𝑝… Either direct or indirect emissions attributed to hydrogen produced over the 
reporting period, expressed in tonnes of CO 2 
𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑒𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒 … Either direct or indirect emissions of the whole production process over the 
reporting period, expressed in tonnes of CO 2 
211 𝑚𝑚𝐻𝐻2,𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑒𝑝𝑝 … Mass of hydrogen sold or used as precursor over the reporting period, 
expressed in tonnes  
𝑚𝑚𝐻𝐻2,𝑖𝑖𝐷𝐷𝑐𝑐𝑝𝑝…Mass of hydrogen produced over the reporting period, expressed in tonnes  
𝑚𝑚𝑁𝑁𝑒𝑒2,𝑖𝑖𝐷𝐷𝑐𝑐𝑝𝑝 …Mass of chlorine produced over the r eporting period, expressed in tonnes  
𝑚𝑚𝑁𝑁𝑒𝑒𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻 ,𝑖𝑖𝐷𝐷𝑐𝑐𝑝𝑝 … Mass of sodium hydroxide (caustic soda) produced over the reporting 
period, expressed in tonnes, calculated as 100% NaOH  
𝑚𝑚𝑁𝑁𝑒𝑒𝑁𝑁𝑒𝑒𝐻𝐻3,𝑖𝑖𝐷𝐷𝑐𝑐𝑝𝑝 … Mass of sodium chlorate produced over the reporting period, expressed 
in tonnes, calculated as 100% NaClO 3 
𝑀𝑀𝐻𝐻2 … Molar mass of H 2 (2,016 kg/kmol)  
𝑀𝑀𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑒2 … Molar mass of Cl 2 (70,902 kg/kmol)  
𝑀𝑀𝑁𝑁𝑒𝑒𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻… Molar mass of NaOH (39,997 kg/kmol)  
𝑀𝑀𝑁𝑁𝑒𝑒𝑁𝑁𝑒𝑒𝐻𝐻3 … Molar mass of NaClO 3 (106,438 kg/kmol)  
Exclusions  
As an operator, you should note that only the production of pure hydrogen or mixtures of 
hydrogen with nitrogen usable in ammonia production shall be considered. Not covered 
are the production of synthesis gas or of hydrogen within refineries or organic ch emical 
installations, where the hydrogen is exclusively used within those plants and not used for 
the production of goods under the CBAM Regulation. 
7.5.1.3 Additional reporting requirements  
The following Table 7-24 lists out the additional information that should be provided by 
you as an operator to importers, in your emissions data communication to them. 
Table 7 -24: Additional ch emical sector parameters requested in the CBAM report  
Aggregated good 
category  Reporting requirement in the quarterly report  
Hydrogen  – None   
 
These parameters depend on the goods produced. There is no additional reporting required 
for hydrogen.  
7.5.2 Worked examples for the hydrogen sector  
7.5.2.1 Example 1 – methane steam reforming  
The following worked example shows how specific embedded emissions are derived for 
hydrogen produced by the steam reforming production route .  
The resulting embedded emissions of  imports into the EU are then calculated at the end of 
the example for reporting in the transitional period. 
212 The diagram below gives an outline view of the installation and shows the system 
boundaries as a hatched line for the single production process. The  physical units carrying 
out the production process have been grouped under ‘steam reforming’ and the inputs and 
outputs and sources of emissions have been identified. 
Figure 7-17: Hydrogen example No.1 – Overview  and complete monitoring approach for hydrogen  
 
 
 
A single production process  is defined for steam reforming. Inputs are natural gas (both as 
a raw material / feedstock for the process, and as a fuel) and electrical energy. Outputs are 
hydrogen product  and heat exported to other parts of the installation or to a district heating 
network .  
The inputs and outputs highlighted in red text in Table 7- 25 are the parameters that would 
need to be monitored by the operator in order to attribute emissions and determine direct and indirect specific embedded emissions for the production process.  
The direct and indirect emissions that are monitored in this example result from: 
• Direct  emissions from f uel combustion and from the steam reforming  process
147. 
• For the purpose of calculating attributed emissions of the process, an equivalent of 
emissions associated with the  heat export  needs to be determined, and subtracted 
from attributed emissions. See section 6.2.2.2 for calculation approach, and section  
6.7.2 for monitoring requirements . 
• Indirect emissions from the electrical energy consumed by the production process.  
The activity level of the hydrogen good produced also needs to be monitored. 
Table 7-25 summarise s the inputs and outputs from the process that are monitored for 
determining  total direct and indirect specific embedded emissions . 
 
147  Emissions of carbon monoxide (CO ) to the atmosphere from the process are not counted as outgoing 
source stream in the mass balance but are cons idered as the molar equivalent amount of CO 2 emissions . 

213 Table 7-25: Example calculation of t otal direct emissions attributed to hydrogen net of emissions 
for a heat export . 
Direct emissions  AD (t) NCV 
(GJ/t) Energy 
(TJ) EF 
(t CO 2/TJ) Emissions  
(t CO 2) 
Input natural gas  190 000 48 9 120 56,1 511 632 
Heat export    -800 56,1 -44 800 
Total direct emissions of the 
installation      466 832 
 
Total direct emissions of the installation result from one single source stream (natural 
gas). There is no need to distinguish combustion and process emissions  for this purpose . 
In this example , these are wholly attributed to the hydrogen product, net of e missions 
attributed to a heat export. If the almost pure CO 2 produced by this process were to be 
captured and transferred to a geological CO 2 storage site, the related emissions could be 
deducted, provided the receiving installation carries out monitoring under the CBAM or 
an equivalent MRV system (see section 6.5.6.2).   
Table 7 -26: Total indirect emissions attributed to hydrogen  
Indirect emissions  AD ( MWh ) EF (t CO 2 / MWh)  Emissions (t CO 2) 
Electricity consumption  33 000 0,367148 12 096 
Total indirect emissions of the installation    12 096  
 
The emission factor ( EF) for electricity used in Table 7- 26 above is based on the 
emission factor for natural gas, using an efficiency of a combined cycle power plant . 
Total indirect emission s of the installation attributed to the hydrogen product are 12 096 t  
CO 2. Using the data in the tables above , in Table 7 -26 the specific embedded emissions 
for hydrogen are calculated, using direct and indirect emissions and the production level 
for hydrogen in the reporting period. 
Table 7 -27: Calculation of embedded emissions of hydrogen product  (example)  
Production   Process total emissions  (t CO 2) SEE (t CO 2 / t H 2) 
Product  Activity level (t) Direct  Indirect  Direct  Indirect  
Hydrogen  55 000 466 832 12 096  8,488  0,220 
 
Using the above approach, the CBAM reporting obligation for the import of hydrogen 
product into the EU during the transitional period may then be determined; for example, for the import of 100 tonnes of hydrogen product produced by methane steam reformatting : 
  
 
148  Source of EF is Annex VIII, Table 1 – EF for natural gas is 56,1 t CO 2/TJ multiplied b y 0,0036 to convert 
this value into its equivalent value of 0,202 t CO 2 / MW h. Then 55% efficiency for a combined cycle 
gas power plant is assumed.  
214 • Transitional period (report only): 
o Direct embedded emissions = 100 t x 8,488 t / t CO 2 = 848,8 t CO 2 
o Indirect embedded emissions = 100 t x 0,220 t / t CO 2= 22,0 t CO 2 
Total: 870,8 t CO 2 
 
7.5.2.2 Example 2 – chlor- alkali electrolysis  
The following worked example shows how specific embedded emissions are derived for 
hydrogen product, produced by the chlor- alkali production route.  
The resulting embedded emissions of  imports into the EU are then calculated at the end of 
the example, for reporting in the transitional period.  
The diagram below gives an outline view of the installation and shows the system 
boundaries as a hatched line for the single production process. The physical units carrying 
out the production process have been grouped under ‘ Electrolysis’ and the inputs and 
outputs and sources of emissions have been identified. 
Figure 7-18 : Hydrogen example No.2 – Overview  and complete monitoring approach for hydrogen  
 
 
 
A single production process  is defined for chlor -alkali electrolysis. Inputs are salt as a 
feedstock and electrical energy for electrolysis. Outputs are co -products chlorine, caustic 
soda and hydrogen product. There are no direct emissions , and no source streams to be 
monitored.  The inputs and outputs highlighted in red text above are the parameters that would need to 
be monitored by the operator in order to attribute emissions and determine direct and indirect specific embedded emissions for the production process.  Production process (b)Electrolysis
Hydrogen
CN 2804 10 Salt ( NaCl )
Electricity
Chlorine
(Cl2)Caustic soda 
(NaOH )

215 There are no direct emissions in this example. I ndirect emissions that are monitored in this 
example result from: 
• Electrical energy consumed by the production process.  
The activity levels of chlorine and caustic soda as well as  that for the hydrogen good 
produced need to be monitored in order to perform the required split of emissions by 
product . For the example it is assumed that only a part of the hydrogen produced is also 
sold. 
Table 7-28 summarise s the inputs and outputs from the production process that are 
monitored in order to determin e total  specific embedded emissions.  
Table 7-28: Example production levels for th e reporting period and calculation of the molar 
proportions  
Product  AD (t)  Molar mass 
(kg/kmol ) Molar proportion  
AD / molar mass   
(t kmol / kg)  
Hydrogen (H 2) produced  5 687  
2,016  2 820, 8 
Hydrogen (H 2) sold  1 200 595,2  
Chlorine (Cl 2) produced  200 000  70,902  2 820, 8 
Caustic Soda (NaOH)  produced  225 647  39,997  5 641, 6 
 
As hydrogen product is produced simultaneously alongside chlorine and caustic soda, its 
share of emissions resulting from the production process are attributed to it using the chlor -alkali electrolysis equation above  (section 7.5.1.2) . The attribution factor for the 
sold hydrogen fraction in this equation is calculated using the molar proportions in Table 7-28 above:  
• Attribution factor for hydrogen = 595,2 / (2  820,8 + 2 820,8 + 5  641,6) = 0,0528 
Table 7 -29: Total indirect emissions for the chlor -alkali electrolysis process  
Indirect emissi ons MWh  EF (t CO 2 / MW h) Emissions (t CO 2) 
Electricity consumption  520 000  0,367 190 604  
Total indirect emissions of the installation    190 604  
 
The attribution factor of 0,0528 calculated above is used to attribute indirect emissions to 
the hydrogen fraction, as below : 
o Indirect embedded emissions attributed to hydrogen product = 0,0528 x 
190 604 t CO 2 = 10 064 t CO 2 
o Dividing by hydrogen production level gives the specific indirect embedded 
emissions: 10 064 t CO 2 / 1 200 t H 2 = 8,387 t CO 2 / t H 2 
Using the above approach, the CBAM reporting obligation due for the import of hydrogen into the EU during the transitional period may then be determined;  for 
216 example, for the import of 100 tonnes of hydrogen produced by chlor -alkali electrolysis 
product:  
• Transitional period (report only):  
o Direct embedded emissions = 0 t CO 2  
o Indirect embedded emissions = 100 t x 8,387 t CO 2 / t = 838,7 t CO 2 
Total: 837,9 t CO 2 
 
7.6 Electricity “as a good” (i.e. imported into the EU)  
The textbox below signposts sector -specific sections in the Implementing Regulation, 
relevant for the CBAM transitional period.  
Implementing Regulation references:  
• Annex II, Section 3  – Special provisions and emissions monitoring 
requirements by production route. Sub- section 3.19 (Electricity)  
• Annex III, Section D – Monitoring of electricity, s ub-sections D.1 to D.2  
 
Where electricity is imported into the EU as a good on its own, i.e. not included in the 
indirect emissions of a (tangible) good, specific rules apply. Firstly, only direct emissions exist. Secondly, it is the exception from the rule that actual emissions are monitored instead of using a default factor for the embedded emissions. For calculating those emissions, the formula given in section 6.6 is used. For the emission factor of electricity, the rules given 
in section D.2 of Annex III to  the Implementing Regulation have to be applied, which are 
explained below.  
The following options for determining the emission factor of electricity apply:  
(a) As the def ault case, the specific default value for a third country, group of third 
countries or region within a third country shall be used. That value is determined 
by the Commission based on the best data available them. These are CO
2 emission 
factors149 based on data from the International Energy Agency (IEA) and are 
provided by the Commission in the CBAM Transitional Registry. 
(b) Where no specific default value is available pursuant to point (a), the CO 2 emission 
factor in the EU as set out in point D.2.2 of this An nex shall be used. It is also based 
on IEA data and provided via the CBAM Transitional Registry. 
(c) Where a reporting declarant submits sufficient evidence based on official and 
public information to demonstrate that the applicable CO 2 emission factor is 
lowe r than the values in accordance with points (a) and (b), and where the 
 
149  The CBAM Regulation defines: ‘ CO 2 emission factor’, means the weighted average of the CO 2 intensity 
of electricity produced from fossil fuels within a geographic area. The CO 2 emission factor is the result 
of the division of the CO 2 emission data of the electricity sector by the gross electricity generation based 
on fossil fuels in the relevant geographic are a. It is expressed in tonnes of CO 2 per megawatt -hour . 
217 conditions provided in section 7.6.1 are fulfilled, the reporting declarant may 
determine the CO 2 emission factor based on the method described in that section. 
(d) The actual emissions data  of a specific electricity producing installation may be 
used, if the criteria given in section 7.6.2 are met, and the calculation is based on 
data determined according to Annex III to  the Implementing Regulation, as 
explained in section 7.6.2. 
 
7.6.1 CO 2 emission factor based the reporting declarant’s data  
For the purpose of point (c) mentioned above, the reporting declarant shall provide the 
datasets f rom alternative official sources , including national statistics for the five -years 
period ending two years before the reporting . This timeframe was chosen to reflect the 
impact of decarbonisation policies (e.g. increase in renewable energy production) as well 
as climatic conditions (e.g. particularly cold years) on the yearly electricity supply in the 
countries concerned.  
For this purpose, the reporting declarant shall calculate the yearly CO 2 emission factors 
per fossil fuel technology and its respective gross electricity generation in the country exporting electricity to the EU, based on the following equation:  
 𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒,𝑜𝑜=∑𝐸𝐸𝐹𝐹𝑑𝑑×𝐸𝐸𝑛𝑛𝑙𝑙,𝑑𝑑,𝑦𝑦𝐼𝐼
𝑑𝑑
𝐸𝐸𝑛𝑛𝑙𝑙,𝑦𝑦 
Where:  
𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒,𝑜𝑜 is the yearly CO 2 emission factor  for all fossil fuel technologies in the given year 
in the third country capable of exporting electricity to the EU;  
𝐴𝐴𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒,𝑜𝑜 is the total gross electricity generation from all fossil fuel technologies in that year; 
𝐴𝐴𝐹𝐹𝐷𝐷 is the CO 2 emission factor for e ach fossil fuel technology ‘ i’, and  
𝐴𝐴𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒,𝐷𝐷,𝑜𝑜 is the yearly gross electricity generation for each fossil fuel technology ‘i’.  
 
Then the CO 2 emission factor is calculated as a moving average of those years:  
 𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒=∑𝐸𝐸𝑖𝑖𝑛𝑛𝑙𝑙,𝑑𝑑𝑦𝑦−2
𝑦𝑦−6
5  
Where:  
𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒 is the CO 2 emission factor resulting from the moving average of the CO 2 emission 
factors of the 5 previous years, starting from the current year, minus two years, until the 
current year, minus 6 years;  
𝐴𝐴𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒,𝑜𝑜 is the CO 2 emission factor for each year ' i'; 
i is the variable index for the years to consider, and  
y is the current year.  
218 7.6.2 CO 2 emission factor based on actual CO 2 emissions of the installation  
For allowing an importer of electricity to use actual emissions data of a specific electricity 
producing installation, all of the criteria (a) to (d) provided in Section 5 of Annex IV to t he 
CBAM Regulation have to be fulfilled, which are:  
(a) The amount of electricity for which the use of actual embedded emissions is claimed is covered by a power purchase agreement  between the authorised 
CBAM declarant and a producer of electricity located in a third country;  
(b) The installation producing electricity is either directly connected to the Union 
transmission system or  it can be demonstrated that at the time of export there 
was no physical network congestion  at any point in the network between the 
installation and the Union transmission system;  
(c) The installation producing electricity does not emit more than 550 grammes of 
CO
2 of fossil fuel origin per kWh  of electricity;  
(d) The amount of electricity for which the use of actual embedded emissions is claimed has been firmly nominated to the allocated interconnection capacity  
by all responsible transmission system operators in the country of origin, the country of destination and, if relevant, each country of transit, and the nominated capacity and the producti on of electricity by the installation refer to the same 
period of time, which shall not be longer than one hour. 
Furthermore, the said installation must determine the emission factor of electricity in line with Annex III to  the implementing Regulation, i.e . as explained in section 6.7.3 or section  
6.7.4 in case of CHP. The installation’s direct emissions are to be determined as discussed 
in section 6.5. 
  
219 8 EXEMPTIONS FROM THE CBAM  
During the transitional period c ertain general  exemptions apply, which are listed below .  
Implementing Regulation references:  
• The CBAM Regulation (EU) 2023/956, Section  I, Article 2 Scope, paragraphs 3, 4 and 7; Annex III 
Third countries and territories outside the scope of this Regulation for the purpose of Article 2.  
 
 
De minimis exemption  
Small quantities (de minimis) of imported goods that are in scope for the CBAM may be 
automatically treated as exempt from the provisions of the CBAM legislation , provided  
that the value of these goods is negligible, that is to say does not exceed EUR 150 per 
consignment150. This exemption also  applies  during the transitional phase.  
Military use exemption151 
An exemption a pplies to any goods imported to be used by the military authorities of 
Member States, or under agreement with those of a non- EU count ry, under the EU’s 
Common Security and Defence Polic y, or under NATO.  
EFTA exemption  
Countries which apply the EU ETS ( Norway , Iceland , Liechtenstein ), or which have an 
ETS fully linked to the EU ETS ( Switzerland ), are exempted from the CBAM. 
Countries exempted for goods other than electricity are listed in Annex III, section 1 of the 
CBAM Regulation; countries exempted for electricity would be added to section 2 of that Annex, which is currently empty. 
Limited exemption for electricity import s 
Imports of electricty from non-EU count ries are covered by the CBAM , unless the non-
EU count ry is so closely integrated with the EU internal market for electricity that a 
technical solution to apply the CBAM to these imports  cannot be found; this exemption  
only appl ies in limited circumstances and is subject to the conditions outlined in Article 2 
of the CBAM R egulation. 
 
150  Article 23 of Council Regulation (EC) No 1186/2009. See: https://eur -
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2009:324:0023:0057:EN:PDF  
151  Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/2446 of 28 July 2015 supplementing Regulation (EU) No 
952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards detailed rules concerning certain provisions of the Union Customs Code.  
220 Annex A  List of abbreviations  
Abbreviation  Full term  
AD Activity Data  
AEM  Anode Effect Minutes  
AEO  Anode Effect Overvoltage  
AL Activ ity Level  
AOD Argon Oxygen Decarburisation. 
BAT  Best Available Techniques  
BF Biomass Fraction  
BFG  Blast Furnace Gas  
BOF  Basic Oxygen Furnace  
BOFG  Basic Oxygen Furnace Gas  
BREFs  Best Available Techniques reference documents  
CA Competent Authority 
CBAM  Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism , the 
CCR  Clinker to Cement Ratio  
CCS  Carbon Capture and Storage  
CCU  Carbon Capture and Utilisation 
CCUS  Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage  
CEMS  Continuous Emission Measurement Systems  
CF Conversion Factor  
CFP  Carbon footprint of products  
CHP  Combined Heat and Power  
CKD Cement Kiln Dust 
CN Combined nomenclature  
COG  Coke Oven Gas  
DRI Direct Reduced  Iron 
EAF  Electric Arc Furnace  
EF Emission Factor  
EFTA  European Free Trade Area 
EORI  Economic Operator Registration and Identification 
ETS  Emissions Trading System  
EU ETS  EU Emissions Trading System  
EUA EU Allowances (used in the EU ETS)  
EUR Euro (currency)  
221 Abbreviation  Full term  
FAR  Free Allocation Rules (Regulation 2019/331)152 
GHG  Greenhouse Gas  
GWP  Global Warming Potential 
HBI Hot Briquetted Iron  
HS Harmonised System (for international trade)  
IEA International Energy Agency 
ISO International Organization for Standardization 
LULUCF  Land -use, land change and forestry (criteria)  
MMD  Monitoring Methodology Documentation  
MRR  Monitoring and Reporting Regulation (Regulation 2018/2066)153 
MRV  Monitoring, Reporting and Verification 
MS Member State(s)  
MWh  Megawatt -hour 
NCV  Net Calorific Value  
NPI Nickel pig iron 
OF Oxidation Factor  
PCI Pulverised Coal Injection  
PEMS  Predictive Emission Monitoring System  
PFC  Perfluoro -carbon  
PoS Proofs of Sustainability 
RED II  Renewable Energy Directive, re- cast 
SEE  Specific embedded emissions  
TARIC Integrated Tariff of the European Union database  
TJ Terajoules  
TSO  Transmission System Operator  
UCC  Union Custom Code  
UN/LOCODE  United Nations Code for Trade and Transport Location 
 
 
152  Free Allocation Rules (Commission Delegated Regulation ( EU) 2019/331 of 19 December 2018 
determining transitional Union- wide rules for harmonised free allocation of emission allowances 
pursuant to Article 10a of Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council)  
153 Monitoring and Reporting Regul ation  (Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2066 of 19 
December 2018 on the monitoring and reporting of greenhouse gas emissions pursuant to Directive 
2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and amending Commission Regulation (EU) No 601/2012  
222 Annex B  List of definitions  
Term  Definition  
‘Accuracy’  means the closeness of the agreement between the result of 
a measurement and the true value of the particular quantity or a reference value determined empirically using internationally accepted and traceable calibration materials and standard methods, taki ng into account both random 
and systematic factors;  
‘Activity data’  means the amount of fuels or materials consumed or produced by a process relevant for the calculation- based 
methodology, expressed in terajoules  (TJ), mass in tonnes 
or (for gases) volume in normal cubic metres, as appropriate  
‘Actual emissions’  means the emissions calculated based on primary data from the production processes of goods and from the production of electricity consumed during those processes as determined in accordance  with the methods set out in 
Annex IV [ to the Implementing Regulation]  
‘Activity level’  means the quantity of goods produced (expressed in MWh for electricity, or in tonnes for other goods) within the boundaries of a production process  
‘Agricultural, aquaculture, fisheries 
and forestry residues’  means residues that are directly generated by agriculture, aquaculture, fisheries and forestry and that do not include residues from related industries or processing 
‘Authorised CBAM 
declarant’  means  a person authorised by the competent authority in accordance with Article 17  of the CBAM Regulation (EU) 
2023/956 
‘Batch’  means an amount of fuel or material representatively sampled and characterised, and transferred as one shipment or continuously over a specific period of time  
‘Biomass’  means the biodegradable fraction of products, waste and residues from biological origin from agriculture, including vegetal and animal substances, from forestry and related industries, including fisheries and aquaculture, as well as the biodegradable fraction of waste, including industrial 
and municipal waste of biological o rigin  
‘Biomass fraction’  means the ratio of carbon stemming from biomass to the total carbon content of a fuel or material, expressed as a fraction  
‘Calculation factors’  means net calorific value, emission factor, preliminary emission factor, oxidation f actor, conversion factor, carbon 
content or biomass fraction 
223 Term  Definition  
‘Calibration’  means the set of operations, which establishes, under 
specified conditions, the relations between values indicated by a measuring instrument or measuring system, or values represented by a material measure or a reference material 
and the corresponding values of a quantity realised by a 
reference standard  
‘Carbon price’  means the monetary amount due in a third country, under a 
carbon emissions reduction scheme, in the form of a tax, levy or fee or in the form of emission allowances under a greenhouse gas emissions trading system, calculated on greenhouse gases covered by such a measure, and released during the production of goods  
‘CBAM certificate’  means a certificate in electronic format corresponding to 
one tonne of CO 2e of embedded emiss ions in goods  
‘CO 2 emission factor’  means the weighted average of the CO 2 intensity of 
electricity produced from fossil fuels within a geographic 
area. The CO 2 emission factor is the result of the division of 
the CO 2 emission data of the electricity sector by the gross 
electricity generation based on fossil fuels in the relevant geographic area. It is expressed in tonnes of CO
2 per 
megawatt -hour 
‘Combined nomenclature’  (CN)  means the classification of goods, designed to meet the needs of: i) the Common customs tariff, setting import duties for products imported into the European Union (EU), 
as well as the Integrated tariff of the European 
Communit ies (Taric), incorporating all EU and trade 
measures applied to goods imported into and exported out of the EU; ii) the international trade statistics of the EU.  
The CN provides the means of collecting, exchanging and publishing data on EU international tr ade statistics. It is 
also used for the collection and publication of international trade statistics in intra -EU trade.
154 
‘Combustion 
emissions’  means greenhouse gas emissions occurring during the exothermic reaction of a fuel with oxygen  
‘Competent authority’  means the authority designated by each Member State in accordance with Article 11 of the CBAM Regulation (EU) 2023/956 
‘Continuous emission 
measurement’ (CEM)  means a set of operations having the objective of determining the value of a quantity by means of periodic measurements, applying either measurements in the stack or extractive procedures with a measuring instrument 
located close to the stack, whilst excluding measurement 
methodologies based on the collection of individual samples from the stack  
 
154  For definition see: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics -
explained/index.php?title=Glossary:Combined_nomenclature_(CN)  
224 Term  Definition  
‘Complex goods’  means goods other than simple goods  
‘Conservative’   means that a set of assumptions is defined in order to 
ensure that no under -estimation of reported emissions or 
over-estimation of production of heat, electricity or goods 
occurs  
‘Conversion factor’  means the ratio of carbon emitted as CO 2 to the total carbon 
contained in the source stream before the emitting process takes place, expressed as a fraction, considering CO emitted to the atmosphere as the molar equivalent amount of CO
2 
‘Customs declarant’  means the declarant as defined in Article 5(15) of 
Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 lodging a customs 
declaration for release for free circulation of goods in its 
own name or the person in whose name such a declaration 
is lodged 
‘CCUS system’  means a group of economic operators with technicall y 
connected installations and transport equipment for CO 2 
capture, transport, use in production of goods, or geological storage  
‘Data flow activities ’ mean activities related to the acquisition, processing and 
handling of data that are needed to draft an emissions report from primary source data  
‘Data set’  means one type of data, either at installation level or production process level as relevant in the circumstances, as any of the following:  
(a) the amount of fuels or materials consumed or 
produced by a production process as relevant for the calculation -based methodology, expressed in terajoules, 
mass in tonnes, or for gases as volume in normal cubic metres, as appropriate, including for waste gases;  
(b) a calculation factor;  
(c) net quantity of  measurable heat, and the relevant 
parameters required for determining this quantity, in particular: i) mass flow of heat transfer medium; and ii) enthalpy of transmitted and returned heat transfer medium, as specified by composition, temperature, pressure  and 
saturation;  
(d) quantities of non- measurable heat, specified by the 
relevant quantities of fuels used for producing the heat, and the net calorific value (NCV) of the fuel mix;  
(e) quantities of electricity;  
(f) quantities of CO
2 transferred between installations; 
(g) quantities of precursors received from outside the 
installation, and their relevant parameters, such as country of origin, used production route, specific direct and 
indirect emissions, carbon price due;  
225 Term  Definition  
(h) paramete rs relevant for a carbon price due  
‘Default value’  means a value, which is calculated or drawn from 
secondary data, which represen ts the  embedded emissions 
in goods  
‘Direct emissions’  mean s emissions from the production processes of goods 
including emissions from the production of heating and 
cooling that is consumed during the production processes, irrespective of the location of the production of the heating and cooling 
‘Eligible monitoring, 
reporting and verification (MRV)  system’  mean s the MRV systems where the installation is 
established155 for the purpose of a ‘carbon pricing scheme’, 
or compulsory emission monitoring schemes, or an 
emission monitoring scheme at the installation which can 
include verification by an accredited verifier, in accordance 
with Article 4(2) of the CBAM Implementing Regulation  
‘Embedded emissions’  mean s direct emissions released during the production of 
goods and indirect emissions from the production of 
electricity that is consumed during the production processes , calculated in accordance with the methods set 
out in Annex I V and further specified in the  Implementing 
Regulations adopted pursuant to Article 7( 7) 
‘Emissions’  mean the release of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere from the production of goods  
‘Emission factor’  means the average emission rate of a greenhouse gas relative to the activity data of a source stream assuming complete oxidation for combustion and complete conversion for all other chemical reactions  
‘Emission factor’ for 
electricity  means the default value, expressed in CO 2e, representing 
the emission intensity of electricity consumed in production of goods. 
‘Emission source’  means a separately identifiable part of an installation or a process within an installation, from which relevant greenhouse gases are emitted  
EU ETS  means the system for greenhouse gas emissions a llowance 
trading within the Union in respect of activities listed in Annex I to Directive 2003/87/EC other than aviation 
activities  
‘Fossil carbon’  means inorganic and organic carbon that is not biomass  
‘Fossil fraction’  means the ratio of fossil and inorganic carbon to the total carbon content of a fuel or material, expressed as a fraction  
‘Fugitive emissions’  means irregular or unintended emissions from sources that are not localised, or too diverse or too small to be monitored individually  
 
155 Refers to the jurisdiction in which the installation is located . 
226 Term  Definition  
‘Goods’   means goods listed in Annex I to  the CBAM Regulation 
(EU) 2023/956 [and Annex II to  the Implementing 
Regulations]  
‘Greenhouse gases’  mean greenhouse gases as specified in Annex I to the 
CBAM Regulation (EU) 2023/956 [and Annex II of the Implementing Regulation Annexes] in relation to each of the goods listed in that Annex 
‘Importer’  
 means either the person lodging a customs declaration for release for free circulation of goods in its own name and on its own behalf or, where the customs declaration is lodged by an indirect customs representative in accordance with Article 18 of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013, the person on whose behalf such a declaration is lodged  
‘Importation’ means release for free circulation as provided for in A rticle 
201 of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 
‘Indirect emissions’  means emissions from the production of electricity, which is consumed during the production processes of goods, regardless of the location of the production of the consumed electricity.  
‘Inhe rent CO 2’ means CO 2 which is part of a source stream.  
‘Installation’ means a stationary technical unit where a production process is carried out  
‘Measurable heat’  means a net heat flow transported through identifiable pipelines or ducts using a heat transfer medium, such as, in particular, steam, hot air, water, oil, liquid metals and salts, for which a heat meter is or could be installed  
‘Measurement point’  means the emission source for which continuous emission measurement systems (CEMS) are used f or emission 
measurement, or the cross -section of a pipeline system for 
which the CO
2 flow is determined using continuous 
measurement systems  
‘Measurement system’  means a complete set of measuring instruments and other equipment, such as sampling and data processing equipment, used to determine variables such as the activity data, the carbon content, the calorific value or the emission 
factor of the greenhouse gas emissions  
‘Minimum 
requirements’  means monitoring methods using the minimum efforts allowed f or determining data in order to result in emission 
data acceptable for the purpose of Regulation (EU) 2023/ 956. 
‘Mixed fuel’  means a fuel which contains both biomass and fossil carbon  
‘Mixed material’  means a material which contains both biomass and fossil carbon  
227 Term  Definition  
‘Net calorific value’ 
(NCV)  means the specific amount of energy released as heat when a fuel or material undergoes complete combustion with oxygen under standard conditions, less the heat of vaporisation of any water formed  
‘Non -measurable 
heat’  means all heat other than measurable heat  
‘Operator’  means any person who operates or controls an installation in a third (i.e. non- EU) country 
‘Oxidation factor’  means the ratio of carbon oxidised to CO 2 as a consequence 
of combustion to the total carbon contained in the fuel, 
expressed as a fraction, considering carbon m onox ide (CO) 
emitted to the atmosphere as the molar equivalent amount 
of CO 2 
‘Preliminary 
emission factor’  means the assumed total emission factor of a fuel or material based  on the carbon content of its biomass fraction 
and its fossil fraction before multiplying it by the fossil fraction to produce the emission factor  
‘Power purchase 
agreement’  means a contract under which a person agrees to purchase electricity directly fro m an electricity producer  
‘Production process’  means the parts of an installation in which chemical or physical processes are carried out to produce goods under an aggregated goods category defined in Table 1 of Section 2 of Annex II, and its specified system boundaries regarding inputs, outputs and corresponding emissions  
‘Production route’ 156 means a specific technology used in a production process to produce goods under an aggregated goods category 
‘Process emissions’  means greenhouse gas emissions other than combustion emissions occurring as a result of intentional and unintentional reactions between substances or their transformation, for a primary purpose other than the generation of heat, including from the following proc esses:  
(a) the chemical, electrolytic or pyrometallurgical reduction of metal compounds in ores, concentrates and secondary materials; (b) the removal of impurities from metals and metal compounds; (c) the decomposition of carbonates, in cluding those used for flue gas cleaning ; (d) 
chemical syntheses of products and intermediate products where the carbon bearing material participates in the reaction; (e) the use of carbon containing additives or raw materials; (f) the chemical or electrolytic reduction of metalloid oxides or non- metal oxides such as silicon 
oxides and phosphates.  
 
156 Note that different production routes can fall wi thin the same production process.  
228 Term  Definition  
‘Proxy data’  means annual values which are empirically substantiated or 
derived from accepted sources and which an operator uses to substitute a data set
157 for the purpose of ensuring 
complete reporting when it is not possible to generate all the required data or facto rs in the applicable monitoring 
methodology 
‘Rebate’  means any amount that reduces the amount due or paid by a person liable for the payment of a carbon price, before its payment or after, in a monetary form or in any other form.  
‘Recommended improvement s’ means monitoring methods which are proven means to ensure that data are more accurate or less prone to mistakes than by mere application of minimum requirements, and which may be chosen on a voluntary basis  
‘Reporting declarant’  means any of the following persons:  
(a) the importer who lodges a customs declaration for 
release for free circulation of goods in its own name and on 
its own behalf;   
(b) the importerperson, holding an authorisation to 
lodge a customs declaration referr ed to in Article 182(1) of 
Regulation (EU) No 952/2013l , who declares the 
importation of goods;  
(c) the indirect customs representative, where the 
customs declaration is lodged by the indirect customs 
representative appointed in accordance with Article 1 8 of 
Regulation (EU) No 952/2013, when the importer is established outside the Union or where the indirect customs representative has agreed to the reporting obligations in accordance with Article 32 of Regulation (EU) 2023/956. 
‘Reporting period’  means a period that the operator of an installation has chosen to use as reference for the determination of embedded emissions  
‘Residue’  means a substance that is not the end product(s) that a production process directly seeks to produce; it is not a prim ary aim of the production process and the process has 
not been deliberately modified to produce it  
‘Simple goods’  means goods produced in a production process requiring exclusively input materials and fuels having zero embedded emissions  
 
157 Refers to t he activity data or the calculation factors . 
229 Term  Definition  
‘Source stream’  means any of the following: (a) a specific fuel type, raw 
material or product giving rise to emissions of relevant greenhouse gases at one or more emission sources as a result of its consumption or production; (b) a specific fuel 
type, raw material  or product containing carbon and 
included in the calculation of greenhouse gas emissions 
using a mass -balance method 
‘Specific embedded emissions’  means the embedded emissions of one tonne of goods, expressed as tonnes of CO
2e emissions per tonne of goods  
‘Standard conditions’  means temperature of 273,15 K and pressure conditions of 101 325 Pa defining normal cubic metres (Nm3)  
‘Third country’  means a country or territory outside the customs territory of the European Union 
‘Tonne of CO 2(e)’ means one metric tonne of carbon dioxide (‘CO 2’), or an 
amount of any other greenhouse gas listed in Annex I to the CBAM Regulation with an equivalent global warming 
potential (‘CO
2e‘) 
‘Transmission system 
operator’  means an operator as defined in Article 2(35) of Directive (EU) 2019/944 of the European Parliament and of the Council  (
158). 
‘Uncertainty’  means a parameter, associated with the result of the determination of a quantity, that characterises the dispersion of the values that could reasonably be attributed to the particular quantity, including the effects of systematic as well as of random facto rs, expressed in per 
cent, and describes a confidence interval around the mean value comprising 95% of inferred values taking into account any asymmetry of the distribution of values  
‘Waste’  means any substance or object which the holder discards or intends or is required to discard, excluding substances that have been intentionally modified or contaminated in order to meet this definition  
‘Waste gas’  means a gas containing incompletely oxidi sed carbon in a 
gaseous state under standard conditions which is a result of any of the processes listed under ‘process emissions’  
  
 
158 Directive (EU) 2019/944 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 June 2019 on common 
rules for the internal market for electricity and amending Directive 2012/27/EU (OJ L 158, 14.6.2019, p. 125).  
230 Annex C  Default values  
Default emission factor values have been produced by the European Commission to allow 
operator s and importers of complex goods  to calculate the embedded emissions of 
precursor goods , that are used as inputs and consumed in the production process for other 
CBAM goods, where the actual emissions intensitie s for these precursor goods are not 
available.  
These default values comprise both direct and indirect emissions (where applicable) and 
are expressed in units of tonnes CO 2e emissions per tonne of good.  
However, default values may only be used in the calcul ation of embedded emissions for 
complex goods where precursor emissions contribute less than 20% of the total 
embedded emissions of the complex good.  
The default values can be found on the European Commission’s dedicated website for the 
CBAM.  
Taxonomy of  CBAM goods and precursor default values  
The following sector tables classify  CBAM goods and precursors according to their  4-, 6- 
and 8- digit CN code level. Default values published on the European Commission website 
follow  this hierarchy.  
• Default values given at a 4 -digit CN code level apply to all goods falling within 
this 4 -digit CN code category. 
• Default values supplied at a 6- digit CN code level apply to all goods falli ng 
within this 6 -digit CN code category.  
• Default values supplied at an 8- digit CN code level only apply to this specific 8-
digit CN code good – in most case these 8 -digit codes are for the steel industry, 
reflecting the range of different production routes and alloying elements used. 
Participants wishing to use default  values should note that these are set at a high emissions 
intensity level, and so in most cases  it would be more advantageous to use the actual values 
for precursor goods whe re these are available.  
Table 8 -1: Default values for iron and steel goods by CN code  
Aggregated 
good  
category  Product CN Code  Description  Default value  
(tCO
2e/tonne159 
Sintered 
Ore 2601 12 00 Agglomerated iron ores and concentrates, other than roasted iron pyrites   
Pig iron  7201 Pig iron and spiegeleisen in pigs, blocks or other primary forms   
 
159 Default values are provided on the European Commission’s dedicated website for the CBAM.  
231 Aggregated 
good  
category  Product CN Code  Description  Default value  
(tCO
2e/tonne159 
 7205160 Some products under 7205 
(Granules and powders, of pig iron, spiegeleisen, iron, or steel) may be covered here   
Ferro -
alloy: FeMn  7202 1  
 Ferro -manganese (FeMn)   
Ferro-
alloy: FeCr  7202 4  Ferro -chromium (FeCr)   
Ferro-
alloy: FeNi  7202 6 Ferro -nickel (FeNi)   
DRI 7203 Ferrous products obtained by 
direct reduction of iron ore and other spongy ferrous products   
Crude steel  7206 Iron and non- alloy steel in ingots 
or other primary forms (excluding iron of heading 7203)   
 7206 10 00   
 7206 90 00   
 7207 Semi -finished products of iron or 
non-alloy steel   
 7207 11 11 
7207 11 14 
7207 11 16 7207 12 10 
7207 19 12 
7207 19 80 7207 20 11 
7207 20 15 
7207 20 17 7207 20 32 
7207 20 52 
7207 20 80   
 7207 11 90 7207 12 90 
7207 19 19   
 
160  Only some products of this CN code will qualify as “pig iron”, while other goods of this code are 
classified a s “iron or steel products”  
232 Aggregated 
good  
category  Product CN Code  Description  Default value  
(tCO
2e/tonne159 
7207 20 19 
7207 20 39 
7207 20 59  
 7218 Stainless steel in ingots or other 
primary forms; semi -finished 
products of stainless steel   
 7218 10 00 
7218 99 19 
7218 99 80   
 7218 91 7218 99 11 
7218 99 20   
 7224 Other alloy steel in ingots or 
other primary forms; semi-finished products of other alloy steel  
 7224 10 
7224 90 18 
7224 90 90   
 7224 90 02 
7224 90 03 
7224 90 05 7224 90 07 
7224 90 14 
7224 90 31 
7224 90 38   
Iron or 
steel products  7205 
Granules and powders, of pig iron, spiegeleisen, iron or steel (if not covered under category pig 
iron)   
 7208 Flat-rolled products of iron or 
non-alloy steel, of a width of 600 
mm or more, hot -rolled, not clad, 
plated or coated   
 7209 Flat-rolled products of iron or 
non-alloy steel, of a width of 600 
mm o r more, cold- rolled (cold-
reduced), not clad, plated or coated   
233 Aggregated 
good  
category  Product CN Code  Description  Default value  
(tCO
2e/tonne159 
 7210 Flat-rolled products of iron or 
non-alloy steel, of a width of 600 
mm or more, clad, plated or 
coated   
 7211 Flat-rolled products of iron or 
non-alloy steel, of a width of less 
than 600 mm, not clad, plated or coated   
 7212 Flat-rolled products of iron or 
non-alloy steel, of a width of less 
than 600 mm, clad, plated or 
coated   
 7213 Bars and rods, hot -rolled, in 
irregularly wound coils, of iron 
or non -alloy steel   
 7214 Other bars and rods of iron or 
non-alloy steel, not further 
worked than forged, hot -rolled, 
hot-drawn or hot -extruded, but 
including those twisted after rolling   
 7215 Other bars and rods of iron or non-alloy steel   
 7216 Angles, shapes and sections of iron or non- alloy steel   
 7217 Wire of iron or non- alloy steel   
 7219 Flat-rolled products of stainless 
steel, of a width of 600 mm or more   
 7220 Flat-rolled products of stainless 
steel, of a width of less than 600 mm  
 7221 Bars and rods, hot -rolled, in 
irregularly wound coils, of stainless steel   
 7222 Other bars and rods of stainless steel; angles, shapes and sections of stainless steel   
 7223 Wire of stainless steel   
 7225 Flat-rolled products of other 
alloy steel, of a width of 600 mm or more   
234 Aggregated 
good  
category  Product CN Code  Description  Default value  
(tCO
2e/tonne159 
 7226 Flat-rolled products of other 
alloy steel, of a width of less than 
600 mm   
 7227 Bars and rods, hot -rolled, in 
irregularly wound coils, of other alloy steel   
 7228 Other bars and rods of other alloy steel; angles, shapes and sections, of other alloy steel; hollow drill bars and rods, of alloy or non-alloy steel   
 7229 Wire of other alloy steel   
 7301 Sheet piling of iron or steel, whether or not drilled, punched or made from assembled elements; welded angles, shapes and sections, of iron or steel   
 7302 Railway or tramway track 
construction material of iron or 
steel, the following: rails, check -
rails and rack rails, switch blades, 
crossing frogs, point rods and 
other crossing pieces, sleepers 
(cross -ties), fish - plates, chairs, 
chair wedges, sole plates ( base 
plates), rail clips, bedplates, ties 
and other material specialised for jointing or fixing rails   
 7303 Tubes, pipes and hollow profiles, of cast iron   
 7304 Tubes, pipes  and hollow profiles, 
seamless, of iron (other than cast iron) or steel   
 7305 Other tubes and pipes (for example, welded, riveted or similarly closed), having circular cross -sections, the external 
diameter of which exceeds 406,4 mm, of iron or steel   
 7306 Other tubes, pipes and hollow profiles (for example, open seam or welded, riveted or similarly closed), of iron or steel   
235 Aggregated 
good  
category  Product CN Code  Description  Default value  
(tCO
2e/tonne159 
 7307 Tube or pipe fittings (for 
example, couplings, elbows, sleeves), of iron or steel   
 7308 Structures (excluding prefabricated buildings of heading 9406) and parts of structures (for example, bridges and bridge -sections, lock - gates, 
towers, lattice masts, roofs, roofing frameworks, doors and windows and their frames and thresholds for doors, shutters, balustrades, pillars and columns), of iron or steel; plates, rods, angles, shapes, sections, tubes and the like, prepared for use in structures, of iron or steel   
 7309 Reservoirs, tanks, vats  and 
similar containers for any material (other than compressed or liquefied gas), of iron or steel, of a capacity exceeding 300 l, whether or not lined or heat -
insulated, but not fitted with mechanical or thermal equipment   
 7310 Tanks, casks, drums, cans, boxes and similar containers, for any material (other than compressed or liquefied gas), of iron or steel, of a capacity not exceeding 300 l, whether or not lined or heat -
insulated, but not fitted with mechanical or thermal 
equip ment   
 7311 Containers for compressed or liquefied gas, of iron or steel   
 7318 Screws, bolts, nuts, coach screws, screw hooks, rivets, cotters, cotter pins, washers 
(including spring washers) and 
similar articles, of iron or steel  
 7326 Other articles of iron or steel   
 
236 Table 8 -2 Default values for cement goods by CN code  
Aggregated 
good  
category  Product CN Code  Description  Default value  
(tCO
2e/tonne  
Calcined 
clay 2507 00 80 Kaolin and other kaolinic clays, 
calcined   
Cement 
clinker  2523 10 00 Cement clinkers   
Cement  2523 21 00 White Portland cement, whether or not artificially coloured   
 2523 29 00 Other Portland cement   
 2523 90 00 Other hydraulic cements   
Aluminous cement  2523 30 00 Aluminous cement
161  
 
Table 8 -3 Default values for fertilizer  goods by CN code  
Aggregated good  
category  Product CN Code  Description  Default value  
(tCO 2e/tonne  
Nitric acid  2808 00 00  Nitric acid; sulphonitric acids   
Urea  3102 10  Urea, whether or not in aqueous solution  
Ammonia  2814 Ammonia, anhydrous or in aqueous solution  
Mixed fertilizers  2834 21 00  Nitrates of potassium  
 3102 Mineral or chemical fertilizer s, nitrogenous , 
except 3102 10 (Urea)   
 3102 21 00 Ammonium sulphate   
 3102 29 00 Double salts and mixtures of ammonium sulphate and ammonium nitrate   
 3102 30 Ammonium nitrate, whether or not in aqueous solution  
 3102 40 Mixtures of ammonium nitrate with calcium carbonate or other inorganic non-fertiliz ing substances.  
 3102 50 00 Sodium nitrate   
 
161  Also referred to as ‘Calcium Aluminate Cement’.  
237 Aggregated good  
category  Product 
CN Code  Description  Default value  
(tCO 2e/tonne  
 3102 60 00 Double salts and mixtures of 
calcium nitrate and ammonium nitrate   
 3102 80 00 Mixtures of urea and 
ammonium nitrate in 
aqueous or ammoniacal 
solution   
 3105162 Mineral or chemical 
fertilizer s containing two or 
three of the fertiliz ing 
elements nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium ; 
other fertilizers  
- Except: 3105 60 00 – 
Mineral or chemical fertilizers containing the two fertilising elements phosphorus and potassium   
 3105 20 Mineral or chemical fertilizer s containing the three 
fertilising elements nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium  
- Except: 3105 60 00 – 
Mineral or chemical fertiliz ers containing the two 
fertilising elements phosphorus and potassium   
 3105 30 00 Diammonium 
hydrogenorthophosphate (diammonium phosphate)   
 3105 40 00 Ammonium dihydrogenorthophosphate  
(monoammonium phosphate) 
and mixtures thereof with 
diammonium 
hydrogenorthophosphate 
(diammonium phosphate)   
 3105 51 00 Containing nitrates and phosphates   
 
162 Except 3105 60 00 – Mineral or chemical fertilizers containing the two fertilising elements phosphorus 
and potassium . Excluded as not nitrogenous. Only nitrogen (N) containing fertilizers have significant 
embedded emissions.  
238 Aggregated good  
category  Product 
CN Code  Description  Default value  
(tCO 2e/tonne  
 3105 59 00 Mineral or chemical 
fertilizer s containing the two 
fertiliz ing elements nitrogen 
(excl. nitrate) and phosphorus but not nitrates (excl. ammonium dihydrogenorthophosphate "monoammonium phosphate", diammonium hydrogenorthophosphate "diammonium phosphate"   
 
Table 8 -4  Default values for aluminium goods by CN code  
Aggregated good  
category  Product CN Code  Description  Default value  
(tCO
2e/tonne  
Unwrought 
aluminium  7601 Unwrought aluminium   
Aluminium products  7603 Aluminium powders and flakes   
 7604 Aluminium bars, rods and profiles   
 7604 10 10 Aluminium bars, rods, not alloyed   
 7604 10 90 Aluminium profiles, not alloyed  
 7604 21 00 Aluminium alloy hollow profiles   
 7604 29 10 Aluminium alloy bars, rods   
 7604 29 90  Aluminium alloy profiles   
 7605 Aluminium wire   
 7606 Aluminium plates, sheets and strip, of a thickness exceeding 0,2 mm   
 7607 Aluminium foil (whether or not printed or backed with paper, paper -board, plastics or similar 
backing materials) of a thickness (excluding any backing) not exceeding 0,2 mm   
 7608  Aluminium tubes and pipes   
239 Aggregated 
good  
category  Product CN Code  Description  Default value  
(tCO
2e/tonne  
 7609 00 00 Aluminium tube or pipe fittings 
(for example, couplings, elbows, sleeves)   
 7610 Aluminium structures (excluding prefabricated buildings of heading 9406) and parts of structures (for example, bridges and bridge -sections, towers, 
lattice masts, roofs, roofing frameworks, doors and windows and their frames and thresholds for doors, balus trades, pillars 
and columns); aluminium plates, rods, profiles, tubes and the like, prepared for use in structures   
 7610 10 00 Doors, windows and their frames and thresholds for doors   
 7610 90 Other structures and parts of structures, of aluminium   
 7610 90 10 Bridges and bridge -sections, 
towers and lattice masts   
 7610 90 90 Structures and parts of structures, of aluminium   
 7611 00 00 Aluminium reservoirs, tanks, vats and similar containers, for 
any material (other than compressed or liquefied gas), of a capacity exceeding 300 litres, whether or not lined or heat -
insulated, but not fitted with mechanical or thermal equipment   
 7612 Aluminium casks, drums, cans, boxes and similar containers (including rigid or collapsible 
tubular containers), for any 
material (other than compressed 
or liquefied gas), of a capacity not exceeding 300 litres, whether or not lined or heat -
insulated, but not fitted with 
mechanical or thermal  
equipment   
 7613 00 00 Aluminium containers for 
compressed or liquefied gas   
240 Aggregated 
good  
category  Product CN Code  Description  Default value  
(tCO
2e/tonne  
 7614 Stranded aluminium wire, 
cables, plaited bands and the like, of aluminium, not electrically insulated   
 7616 Other articles of aluminium  
 7616 10 00 Nails, tacks, staples, screws, bolts, nuts, screw hooks, rivets, cotters, cotter pins, washers and similar articles   
 7616 91 00 Cloth, grill, netting and fencing, of aluminium wire   
 7616 99 10 Other cast articles of aluminium   
 7616 99 90 Other uncast articles of aluminium   
241 Annex D –  Further information on biomass  
As has been explained in section 6.5.4, emissions from biomass may be “zer o-rated” only 
if certain of sustainability and GHG savings criteria  (which are summarised as “RED II 
criteria ” are complied with. These are defined in the “RED II” (re -cast Renewable Energy 
Directive163). This Annex provides further practical advice on the practical application of 
these criteria.  
The following short introduction to the sustainability and GHG savings criteria is based 
on the Commission’s Guidance Document No.3 “Biomass issues in the EU ETS” .   
https://climate.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2022 -10/gd3_biomass_issues_en.pdf    
 
1. Definitions  
For easier understanding of the text below, the following definitions will be useful:  
• ‘Biofuels’ means liquid fuels for transport produced from biomass;  
• ‘Bioliquids’ means liquid fuel for energy purposes other than for transport, including 
electricity and heating and cooling, produced from biomass;  
• ‘Biomass fuels’ means gaseous and solid fuels produced from biomass;  
• ‘Biogas’ means gaseous fuels produced f rom biomass; 
• ‘Waste’ means any substance or object which the holder discards or intends or is required to discard, excluding substances that have been intentionally modified or contaminated in order to meet this definition;  
• ‘Residue’ means a substance that  is not the end product(s) that a production process 
directly seeks to produce; it is not a primary aim of the production process and the process has not been deliberately modified to produce it;  
• ‘Agricultural, aquaculture, fisheries and forestry residues’  means residues that are 
directly generated by agriculture, aquaculture, fisheries and forestry and that do not include residues from related industries or processing;  
• ‘Municipal waste’ means:  (a) mixed waste and separately collected waste from 
households, including paper and cardboard, glass, metals, plastics, bio-  waste, wood, 
textiles, packaging, waste electrical and electronic equipment, waste batteries and accumulators, and bulky waste, including mattresses and furniture; (b) mixed waste and separately  collected waste from other sources, where such waste is similar in 
nature and composition to waste from households; Municipal waste does not include waste from production, agriculture, forestry, fishing, septic tanks and sewage network and treatment, incl uding sewage sludge, end- of-life vehicles or construction and 
demolition waste.  
 
 
163  Directive (EU) 2018/2001, on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources (recast). See: 
http://data.europa.eu/eli/dir/2018/20 01/2022- 06-07  
242 2. Which criteria apply?  
Figure 8-1 presents a “decision tree” to which an operator may adhere in order to determine 
which written procedures have to be included in the MMD , and to determine the emission 
factor of biomass. The numbered steps in this picture mean the following:  
1. The first step is to determine if the source stream consists exclusively of biomass, or 
whether it is mixed with a fossil fraction. In the latter case, the relevant analyses of the biomass fraction or the application of a reasonable default value is necessary (see last sub -heading in section  6.5.1.4). The possibility to apply an emission factor of ze ro 
applies only to the biomass fraction of the source stream.  
The biomass fraction might also be determined based on proofs of sustainability from 
a certification scheme.  
If only a part of the source stream is biomass, the following steps apply only to tha t 
biomass fraction. However, if the necessary evidence for meeting the RED II criteria is available only for a part of that biomass fraction, there are three fractions (one fossil, one biomass part that is treated like being fossil, and a biomass part whic h is zero -
rated because it fulfils the RED  II criteria).  
2. Determine if the source stream is used (primarily) for energy purposes. Only if this is 
the case, the following steps are needed.  
3. If the source stream is municipal solid waste, no further criteria ne ed to be taken into 
account. The biomass fraction may be zero- rated.  
4. Determine if the source stream is any type of forest or agricultural biomass, or (produced from) “residues from agriculture, aquaculture, fisheries or forestry”, as for such source stream s the “land -related” sustainability criteria
164 apply. For other 
residues or waste (including all kinds of industrial wastes, if containing biomass), only GHG savings criteria need t o be complied with
165. 
Note, however, that for biomass stemming from residue s from animals, aquaculture 
and fisheries, the RED II does not list specific land -related sustainability criteria. For 
such materials operators will have to determine only GHG savings. Therefore, go to step 7. 
5. Depending on step 4, the (land -related) sustai nability criteria for the production of 
biofuels, bioliquids or biomass fuel are to be assessed. In short, the operator can rely on the certification of the used material/fuel under an (international) voluntary scheme 
recognised by the Commission.  
 
164  Article 29(2) to (7) of RED II 
165  In line with the methodology given in the Annexes of the RED II, “no emissions shall be allocated to 
wastes and residues” [at the first point of collection] when calculating life cycle emissions and GHG 
savings. This means effectively that for waste of biological origin which is generated directly at the 
[CBAM] installation, the GHG savings criteria will usually be fulfilled, and this will be easily 
demonstrated .  
The tricky point here is to determine if a material is indeed waste, or whether it is a produc t, by-product 
or residue from a production process. For this, the definition of “waste” as given at the start of this Annex should be applied. It excludes explicitly “substances that have been intentionally modified or 
contaminated in order to meet this de finition”. A case- by-case assessment may be required. Some 
RED  II certification schemes may give support by providing confirmation if a material is to be 
considered waste.  
243 Figure 8-1: Decision tree for applying sustainability and GHG saving criteria of the RED II to the monitoring of EU 
ETS source streams.  
 
Picture byYes
YesStart for 
biomass source 
stream X
Is X used for 
energy purpose?No
Is X Solid Municipal 
Waste?Mixed
BiomassNeed to analyse 
fossil / biomass 
fractionIs X a mixed material 
or only biomass?
No1
2
3
Yes
NoAssessed 
Criteria complied 
with?Solid or gaseous 
(biomass fuel)?
Liquid
Installation started 
after 2020?
GHG saving 
criteria met?Yes No Assume EF = 0
For the biomass 
fractionTreat as fossil 
fuel (use 
preliminary EF)NoYes
Yes6 7
8YesAgricultural or  
forestry biomass?
4
Assess sustainability 
criteria
Evidence under national or 
voluntary scheme available?
If no, make own assessment
Assess GHG savings
Evidence under national or 
voluntary scheme available?
If no, make own assessmentNo
105
9
244 If no proof of sustainability under a certification scheme is available to the operator, 
the operator would have to perform the a ssessment of the relevant criteria itself . More 
details on steps 4 and 5 are given in sections 3.1 and 3.2 of this Annex. 
6. If the previous step shows that the relevant sustainability criteria are not complied with, then the operator has to treat the materia l as if it were fossil, i.e. the preliminary 
emission factor becomes the emission factor.  
7. If the source stream is liquid, the assessment of GHG savings is mandatory. Go to step 9. 
8. As the additional requirement for “biomass fuels”, i.e. solid or gaseous biomass, applies only to installations starting operation from 1 January 2021, older installations (more exactly: installations which used biomass already before 2021) do not have to carry out further assessment.  
9. The required GHG savings
166 have to be calculated in accordance with the outline 
given in section 3.2 of this Annex.  
10. If the GHG savings are above the applicable threshold, the biomass can be zero- rated, 
otherwise it has to be treated as if it were fossil. With this step, the assessment is finished. 
 
3. How to provide evidence for RED II criteria  
This section explains how compliance against RED II criteria is checked. While these 
checks are usually performed under a certification scheme, the same considerations are relevant for operators who want to de monstrate compliance with RED II criteria without 
use of a certification scheme.  
Depending on the needs identified using the “decision tree” (section 2 of this Annex), either sustainability criteria, GHG savings criteria, or both or none of these apply. It  is 
therefore possible to discuss sustainability criteria (section 3.1 of this Annex) and GHG savings criteria (section  3.2 of this Annex) separately. Furthermore , the operator will have 
to ensure completeness of information by using a mass balance as required by Article 30(1) of the RED II, which is necessary to ensure that all criteria are tracked without gaps or 
double counting throughout the full chain of custody from the first collection point (harvest of biomass) to the use in the installation.  
For mo re details, please refer to the legal text of the RED II . The aim of the following 
sections is meant only as a short overview for orientation in the RED  II. Furthermore, an 
implementing act on “ rules to verify sustainability and greenhouse gas emissions saving 
criteria and low indirect land- use change -risk criteria ” gives detailed guidance
167. This 
implementing act also gives the framework with which voluntary certification schemes have to comply.  
 
166  Article 29(10 ) of the RED II requires that GHG savings have to be calculated in a ccordance w ith Article 
31(1) of the RED II .  
167 Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/996 on rules to verify sustainability and greenhouse 
gas emissions saving criteria […] , http://data.eur opa.eu/eli/reg_impl/2022/996/oj   
245 Information on voluntary schemes for certification of biofuels and biomass fuels can 
be found at https://ec.europa.eu/energy/topics/renewable- energy/biofuels/voluntary-
schemes_en   
 
3.1 Sustainability criteria  
The sustainability criteria are defined in Articles 29(2) to ( 7) of RED  II. They can be 
summarised as follows: 
• Biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels produced from residues derived from 
agricultural land  (not from forestry) must comply with the conditions laid down in 
Article 29(2) of the RED II:   
“Operators or nati onal authorities [must] have monitoring or management plans in 
place in order to address the impacts on soil quality and soil carbon.”  
• Biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels produced from agricultural biomass (this includes the main product of that land, a s well as residues) must comply with all of 
the following paragraphs of Article 29 of the RED II:  
o Article 29(3) excludes raw material obtained from land with a high 
biodiversity value, namely land that had a specified status in or after January 
2008, whether or not the land continues to have that status. Relevant statuses listed are (a) primary forest and similar, (b) highly biodiverse forest and similar, (c) areas that are nature protected, and (d) highly biodiverse grassland. For Point (d), further criteria are given in an implementing act
168. 
o Article 29(4) prevents the use of land which was converted from land with 
high carbon stocks, namely land that had a specified status in or after January 
2008 and no longer has that status, in particular wetland and continuously 
forested areas.  
o Article 29(5) excludes biomass from former peatland, except if evidenc e is 
provided that no drainage of previously undrained soil is involved.  
• Biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels produced from forest biomass  (including 
residues from forestry) must meet certain criteria to minimise the risk of using forest 
biomass derived from unsustainable production (RED  II Article 29(6)), and must 
meet specified land -use, land- use change and forestry (LULUCF) criteria given by 
Article 29(7).  An implementing act169 provides further guidance.  
• For other biomass (e.g. animal waste or by- produ cts; products, wastes or residues 
from aquaculture and fisheries; biomass from microorganisms, e.g. from industrial fermentation, etc.), no sustainability criteria are defined in the RED II. Therefore, no 
further assessments for these types of biomass are relevant. However, it will be useful 
for an operator to have evidence available that the source stream under discussion 
indeed falls within this category, i.e. it is a waste and not a material intentionally 
modified or contaminated in order to become waste . Some certification schemes 
 
168 Commission Regulation (EU) No 1307/2014 on defining the criteria and geographic ranges of highly 
biodiverse grassland. See http: //data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2014/1307/oj    
169 Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/2448 on establishing operational guidance on the evidence for demonstrating compliance with the sustainability criteria for forest biomass : 
http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_impl/2022/2448/oj   
246 might provide the classification as part of their services, but this should only be 
necessary for borderline cases.  
 
3.2 GHG savings  
When the RED II requires GHG savings to be demonstrated, it means that the energy 
produced from biomass must lead to lower life cycle emissions  than the use of comparable 
fossil fuels. The methodology for calculating GHG savings from biofuels and bioliquids is given in section C of Annex V to the RED  II. For biomass fuels (biogas and solid biomass), 
the methodology is given in section B of Annex VI to the RED  II. A short summary of the 
methodology is given here:  
Step 1 : Calculate the emissions E  from the b iomass use using the formula:  
E = e
ec + e l + e p + e td + e u – esca – e ccs – e ccr 
Where  
eec = emissions from the extraction or cultivation of raw materials170;  
el = annualised emissions from carbon stock changes caused by land- use change;  
ep = emissions fr om processing;  
etd = emissions from transport and distribution;  
eu = emissions from the fuel in use171;  
esca = emission savings from soil carbon accumulation via improved agricultural 
management;  
eccs = emission savings from CO 2 capture and geological storage;  
eccr = emission savings from CO 2 capture and replacement.  
For eec, ep and etd, Annexes V and VI provi de typical and default values for many feedstock 
types and processes for biofuel and biomass fuel production. In the case of solid biomass, 
transport emissions are given dependent of transport distance.  
Installations often consume several types of waste materials or residues for which no 
default values can be found in the RED II. As a simplifying assumption, life cycle emissions of waste at the place and time when the material starts to comply with the definition of waste may be considered zero, if the emissions of sourcing (cultivation, 
transport to upstream processing, and that processing itself) can be reasonably attributed to the main products instead of the waste. Therefore, for such wastes, only the t ransport 
emissions up to the installation (if any) as well as potential emissions from processing 
 
170 Default emission factors at regional (NUTS2) level are available from the Commission’s webs ite 
https://energy.ec.europa.eu/topics/renewable -energy/biofuels/biofuels_en and   
https://energy.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2018 -07/pre -
iluc_directive_nuts2_report_values_mj_kg_july_2018_0.pdf   
171 Annexes V and VI of  the RED II cl arify: “Emissions of the fuel in use, e u, shall be taken to be zero for 
biofuels and bioliquids . Emissions of non- CO 2 greenhouse gases (N 2O and CH 4) of the fuel in use shall 
be included in the e u factor for bioliquids.   
Emissions of CO 2 from fuel in use, e u, shall be taken to be zero for biomass fuels.  Emissions of non-
CO 2 greenhouse gases (CH 4 and N 2O) from the fuel in use shall be included in the e u factor. ” 
247 before combustion (if any) in the installation would have to be taken into account for 
determining their life cycle emissions.  
For eu the methodology in the RED II also gives instructions how the production of heat 
and electricity is to be handled if produced separately or by CHP172. Note that the approach 
to taking into account CHP is different from the approach used in the CBAM173. 
esca may only be taken into account if solid and verifiable evidence is provided. e ccs and 
eccr are only relevant if CCS/CCU are applied.  
Greenhouse gases to be taken into account and their GWP174 values are CO 2, N 2O 
(GWP=298), CH 4 (GWP=25).  
Where a proof of sustainability from a cert ification scheme is available at least for some 
parts of the value chain, the relevant e values for the formula above should be available 
from that proof. Also the GHG savings as calculated below should be given.  Step 2 : Calculate the GHG savings as follows:  
• For the use of (transport) biofuels:  
SAVING = (E
F(t) – E B(t))/E F(t) 
Where:  
EB = total emissions from the biofuel; 
EF = total emissions from the fossil fuel comparator  
• For the production of  heating (and cooling) and electricity:  
SAVING = (EC F(h&c,el) – EC B(h&c,el))/EC F(h&c,el) 
Where:  
EC B(h&c,el)  = total emissions from the biomass fuel or bioliquid;  
EC F(h&c,el)  = total emissions from the fossil fuel comparator for heating, cooling or 
electricity, as applicable  
The generation efficiency η  for heating, cooling or electricity has to be taken into 
account as follows:  
EC = E / η  
 
172 Combined Heat and Power (Cogeneration)  
173  Section 6.7.4 of this guidance document  
174 GWP means the Global Warming Potential. Unfortunately, the GWP values given in the RED II have 
not yet been updated to those of the IPCC’s 5th Assessment Report, which are used by the MRR. 
However, an update of these values by the Commission at a later stage is possible.  
248 The following fossil fuel comparators apply175: 
Purpose  Value of the fossil fuel comparator 
Transport fuels (liquid): E F(t) 94 g CO 2e/MJ  
Production of electricity: EC F(el) 183 g CO 2e/MJ  
Production of useful heat, and heating 
and/or cooling: EC F(h&c)  80 g CO 2e/MJ  
 
In installations, “useful heat” can mean both, measurable and non- measurable heat. When 
measurable heat is generated, an efficiency for heat generation from the fuel is known (or 
can be at least determined in principle). The fossil fuel comparator takes such efficiency into account. For non -measurable heat, however, a fictitious heat generation efficiency of 
η = 90% needs to be applied for making the amount of fuel used compatible with the 
comparator.  
Secondly, if both, heat and electricity are produced in the installation, the respective fuel quantities have to be checked against the respective fossil fuel comparators separately. If a certification scheme is used, the economic operator (which may be the installation’s  
operator) doing the calculation must take the information on the efficiency of heat and electricity generation into account appropriately.  
 
Step 3 : Compare the GHG savings to the criteria given in Article 29(10) of the RED II: 
• For biofuels, biogas consumed in the transport sector and bioliquids , savings 
must be at least 50% if produced
176 in installations in operation before 5 October 
2015, at least 60% for installations starting operation until 31 December 2020, and at 
least 65% for installations starting operation from 1 January 2021. However, this calculation is usually performed by the producer of the biofuel, not by installations consuming such bioliquid or biogas. However, if an installation also uses diverse liquid biomass wastes or biogas
176, it may consider itself to be the producer of the 
bioliquid or biogas. In such case, the GHG savings calculation may have to be performed by the operator of the installation, or by a certification scheme on its  
behalf.  
• For biomass fuels (i.e. solid and gaseous biomass)  consumed in installations, GHG 
savings must be  
o at least 70% in installations starting operation from 1 January 2021 until 31 December 2025,  
o 80% for installations starting operation from 1 January 2026. 
 
 
175 For liquid transport fuels, the comparator refers to the energy content of the fuel (NCV), while for the 
production of he at and electricity, the comparator refers to the amount of heat / electricity produced 
(taking into account the CHP calculation, where relevant).  
176 This criterion is relevant if the installation produces these fuels and delivers them to other users who have to provide proof for RED II compliance, but also if the installation consumes these fuels itself. Regarding biogas, the “for transport” purpose would then not be given. Instead, the criterion for biomass fuels in the next bullet point would apply.  
249 Annex E –  Standard values for emission calculations  
Implementing Regulation: Annex VIII  
Standard factors used in the monitoring of direct emissions at installation level  
Fuel emission factors related to net calorific values (NCV)  
Table 8-5: Fuel emission factors related to net calorific value (NCV) and net calorific 
values per mass of fuel.  
Fuel type description  Emission factor 
(t CO 2/TJ) Net calorific 
value (TJ/Gg)  Source  
Crude oil  73,3 42,3 IPCC 2006 GL  
Orimulsion  77,0 27,5 IPCC 2006 GL  
Natural gas liquids  64,2 44,2 IPCC 2006 GL  
Motor gasoline  69,3 44,3 IPCC 2006 GL  
Kerosene (other than jet 
kerosene)  71,9 43,8 IPCC 2006 GL  
Shale oil  73,3 38,1 IPCC 2006 GL  
Gas/Diesel oil  74,1 43,0 IPCC 2006 GL  
Residual fuel oil  77,4 40,4 IPCC 2006 GL  
Liquefied petroleum gases  63,1 47,3 IPCC 2006 GL  
Ethane  61,6 46,4 IPCC 2006 GL  
Naphtha  73,3 44,5 IPCC 2006 GL  
Bitumen  80,7 40,2 IPCC 2006 GL  
Lubricants  73,3 40,2 IPCC 2006 GL  
Petroleum coke  97,5 32,5 IPCC 2006 GL  
Refinery feedstocks  73,3 43,0 IPCC 2006 GL  
Refinery gas  57,6 49,5 IPCC 2006 GL  
Paraffin waxes  73,3 40,2 IPCC 2006 GL  
White spirit and SBP  73,3 40,2 IPCC 2006 GL  
Other petroleum products  73,3 40,2 IPCC 2006 GL  
Anthracite  98,3 26,7 IPCC 2006 GL  
Coking coal  94,6 28,2 IPCC 2006 GL  
Other bituminous coal  94,6 25,8 IPCC 2006 GL  
Sub-bituminous coal  96,1 18,9 IPCC 2006 GL  
Lignite  101,0  11,9 IPCC 2006 GL  
Oil shale and tar sands  107,0  8,9 IPCC 2006 GL  
Patent fuel  97,5 20,7 IPCC 2006 GL  
Coke oven coke and lignite coke  107,0  28,2 IPCC 2006 GL  
Gas coke  107,0  28,2 IPCC 2006 GL  
Coal tar  80,7 28,0 IPCC 2006 GL  
Gas works gas  44,4 38,7 IPCC 2006 GL  
Coke oven gas  44,4 38,7 IPCC 2006 GL  
Blast furnace gas  260 2,47 IPCC 2006 GL  
Oxygen steel furnace gas  182 7,06 IPCC 2006 GL  
Natural gas  56,1 48,0 IPCC 2006 GL  
Industrial wastes  143 n.a. IPCC 2006 GL  
Waste oils  73,3 40,2 IPCC 2006 GL  
Peat  106,0  9,76 IPCC 2006 GL  
Waste tyres  85,0 (177) n.a. WBCSD CSI  
Carbon m onox ide 155,2 (178) 10,1 J. Falbe and M. Regitz, Römpp Chemie 
Lexikon, Stuttgart, 1995  
Methane  54,9 (179) 50,0 J. Falbe and M. Regitz, Römpp Chemie 
Lexikon, Stuttgart, 1995  
 
(177) This value is the preliminary emission factor, i.e., before application of a biomass fraction, if applicable.  
(178) Based on NCV of 10,12 TJ/t . 
(179) Base d on NCV of 50,01 TJ/t . 
250 Table 8-6: Fuel emission factors related to net calorific value (NCV) and net calorific 
values per mass of biomass material. 
Biomass material  Preliminary EF  
[t CO 2 / TJ]  NCV [GJ/t]  Source  
Wood / Wood waste (air dry  (180)) 112 15,6 IPCC 2006 GL  
Sulphite lyes (black liquor)  95,3 11,8 IPCC 2006 GL  
Other primary solid biomass  100 11,6 IPCC 2006 GL  
Charcoal  112 29,5 IPCC 2006 GL  
Bio gasoline  70,8 27,0 IPCC 2006 GL  
Biodiesels  70,8 37,0 IPCC 2006 GL  (181) 
Other liquid biofuels  79,6 27,4 IPCC 2006 GL  
Landfill gas  (182) 54,6 50,4 IPCC 2006 GL  
Sludge gas (10) 54,6 50,4 IPCC 2006 GL  
Other biogas (10) 54,6 50,4 IPCC 2006 GL  
Municipal waste (biomass fraction)  (183) 100 11,6 IPCC 2006 GL  
 
Emission factors related to process emissions  
Table 8-7 : Stoichiometric emission factor for process emissions from carbonate 
decomposition (Method A) 
Carbonate  Emission factor [t CO 2/ t Carbonate]  
CaCO 3 0,440  
MgCO 3 0,522  
Na2CO 3 0,415  
BaCO 3 0,223  
Li2CO 3 0,596  
K2CO 3 0,318  
SrCO 3 0,298  
NaHCO 3 0,524  
FeCO 3 0,380  
 
(180) The given emission factor assumes around 15% water content of the wood. Fresh wood can have water 
content of up to 50%. For determining the NCV of completely dry wood, the following equation shall  
be used:  
𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑉𝑉=𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑉𝑉𝑝𝑝𝐷𝐷𝑜𝑜∙(1−𝑤𝑤 )−∆𝐺𝐺𝑑𝑑∙𝑤𝑤 
W
here NCV dry is the NCV of the absolute dry material, w  is the water content (mass fraction) and ∆𝐺𝐺𝑑𝑑=
2,4𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺 /𝐴𝐴 𝐺𝐺2𝑂𝑂 is the evaporation enthalpy of water. Using the same equation, the NCV for a given water 
content can be back -calculated from the dry NCV. 
(181) The NCV value is taken from Annex III of Directive (EU) 2018/2001.  
(182) For landfill gas, sludge gas and other biogas: Standard values refer to pure Biomethane. For arriving at 
the correct standard values, a correct ion is required for the m ethane content  of the gas . 
(183) The IPCC guidelines also give values for the fossil fraction of municipal waste: EF =  91,7 t CO 2/TJ; 
NCV = 10 GJ/t  
251 Carbonate  Emission factor [t CO 2/ t Carbonate]  
General  Emission factor =  
[M(CO 2)] / {Y * [M(x)] + Z *[M(CO 32-)]} 
 
X = metal  
M(x) = molecular weight of X in [g/mol]  
M(CO 2) = molecular weight of CO 2 in [g/mol]  
M(CO 32-) = molecular weight of CO 32- in [g/mol]  
Y = stoichiometric number of X  
Z = stoichiometric number of CO 32-  
 
Table 8-8 : Stoichiometric emission factor for process emissions from carbonate 
decomposition based on alkali earth oxides (Method B) 
Oxide Emission factor [t CO 2/ t Oxide]  
CaO 0,785  
MgO  1,092  
BaO 0,287  
general:  
XYOZ Emission factor = 
[M(CO 2)] / {Y * [M(x)] + Z * [M(O)]}  
 
X = alkali earth or alkali metal  
M(x) = molecular weight of X in [g/mol]  
M(CO 2) = molecular weight of CO 2 [g/mol]  
M(O) = molecular weight of O [g/mol]  
Y = stoichiometric number of X  
= 1 (for alkali earth metals)  
= 2 (for alkali metals)  
Z = stoichiometric number of O = 1 
 
Table 8-9:  Emission factors for process emissions from other process materials (production 
of iron or steel, and processing of ferrous metals) (184) 
Input or output material  Carbon content  
(t C/t)  Emission factor  
(t CO 2/t) 
Direct reduced iron (DRI)  0,0191 0,07 
EAF carbon electrodes  0,8188 3,00 
EAF charge carbon  0,8297 3,04 
Hot briquetted iron  0,0191 0,07 
Oxygen steel furnace gas  0,3493 1,28 
Petroleum coke 0,8706 3,19 
Pig iron  0,0409 0,15 
Iron / iron scrap  0,0409 0,15 
Steel / steel scrap  0,0109 0,04 
 
 
 
(184) IPCC 2006 Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories  
252 Global warming potentials for non- CO 2 greenhouse gases  
Table 8-10 : Global warming potentials 
Gas Global warming potential  
N2O 265 t CO 2e / t N 2O 
CF4 6 630 t CO 2e / t CF 4 
C2F6 11 100 t CO 2e / t C 2F6 
 
    
253 ANNEX IX – Harmonised efficiency reference values for separate production of 
electricity and heat  
In the tables below the harmonised efficiency reference values for separate production of 
electricity and heat are based on net calorific value and standard atmospheric ISO conditions (15 °C ambient temperature, 1,013 bar, 60 % relative humidity). 
Table 8-11 : Reference efficiency factors for electricity production  
Category  Type of fuel  Year of construction  
Before 
2012  2012-
2015  From 
2016  
Solids  S1 Hard coal including anthracite, bituminous coal, sub- bituminous 
coal, coke, semi -coke, pet coke  44,2 44,2 44,2 
S2 Lignite, lignite briquettes, shale oil 41,8 41,8 41,8 
S3 Peat, peat briquettes  39,0 39,0 39,0 
S4 Dry biomass including wood and other solid biomass including 
wood pellets and briquettes, dried woodchips, clean and dry waste 
wood, nut shells and olive and other stones  33,0 33,0 37,0 
S5 Other solid biomass including all wood not included under S4 and 
black and brown liquor  25,0 25,0 30,0 
S6 Municipal and industrial waste (non-renewable) and 
renewable/bio -degradable waste  25,0 25,0 25,0 
Liquids  L7 Heavy fuel oil, gas/diesel oil, other oil products  44,2 44,2 44,2 
L8 Bio-liquids including bio-methanol, bioethanol, bio- butanol, 
biodiesel, and other bio-liquids  44,2 44,2 44,2 
L9 Waste liquids including biodegradable and non-renewable waste 
(including tallow, fat and spent grain) 25,0 25,0 29,0 
Gaseous  G10 Natural gas, LPG, LNG and biomethane  52,5 52,5 53,0 
G11 Refinery gases hydrogen and synthesis gas  44,2 44,2 44,2 
G12 Biogas produced from anaerobic digestion, landfill, and sewage 
treatment  42,0 42,0 42,0 
G13 Coke oven gas, blast furnace gas, mining gas, and other recovered 
gases (excluding refinery gas)  35,0 35,0 35,0 
Other  O14 Waste heat (including high temperature process exhaust gases, 
product from exothermic chemical reactions)    
30,0 
 
  
254 Table 8-12 : Reference efficiency factors for heat production  
Category  Type of fuel  Year of construction  
Before 2016  From 2016  
Hot 
water Steam  
(185) Direct 
use of 
exhaust 
gases 
(186) Hot 
water Steam  
(185) Direct 
use of 
exhaust 
gases  
(186) 
Solids  S1 Hard coal 
including 
anthracite, 
bituminous 
coal, sub -
bituminous 
coal, coke, 
semi -coke, pet 
coke  88 83 80 88 83 80 
S2 Lignite, lignite 
briquettes, shale 
oil 86 81 78 86 81 78 
S3 Peat, peat 
briquettes  86 81 78 86 81 78 
S4 Dry biomass 
including wood 
and other solid 
biomass 
including wood 
pellets and 
briquettes, dried 
woodchips, 
clean and dry 
waste wood, nut 
shells and olive 
and other stones  86 81 78 86 81 78 
S5 Other solid 
biomass 
including all 
wood not 
included under 
S4 and black 
and brown 
liquor  80 75 72 80 75 72 
S6 Municipal and 
industrial waste 
(non-renewable) 
and 
renewable/bio -
degradable 
waste  80 75 72 80 75 72 
Liquids  L7 Heavy fuel oil, 
gas/diesel oil, 
other oil 
products  89 84 81 85 80 77 
 
(185) If steam plants do not account for the condensate return in their calculation of CHP (combined 
heat and power)  heat efficiencies, the steam efficiencies shown in the table above sh all be 
increased by 5 percentage points.  
(186) Values for direct use of exhaust gases sh all be used if the temperature is 250  °C or higher.  
255 Category  Type of fuel  Year of construction  
Before 2016  From 2016  
Hot 
water Steam  
(185) Direct 
use of 
exhaust 
gases 
(186) Hot 
water Steam  
(185) Direct 
use of 
exhaust 
gases  
(186) 
L8 Bio-liquids 
including bio -
methanol, 
bioethanol, bio-
butanol, 
biodiesel, and 
other bio-
liquids  89 84 81 85 80 77 
L9 Waste liquids 
including 
biodegradable 
and non-
renewable 
waste 
(including 
tallow, fat and 
spent grain)  80 75 72 75 70 67 
Gaseous  G10 Natural gas, 
LPG, LNG and 
biomethane  90 85 82 92 87 84 
G11 Refinery gases 
hydrogen and 
synthesis gas  89 84 81 90 85 82 
G12 Biogas 
produced from 
anaerobic 
digestion, 
landfill, and 
sewage 
treatment  70 65 62 80 75 72 
G13 Coke oven gas, 
blast furnace 
gas, mining gas, 
and other 
recovered gases 
(excluding 
refinery gas)  80 75 72 80 75 72 
Other  O14 Waste heat 
(including high 
temperature 
process exhaust 
gases, product 
from 
exothermic 
chemical 
reactions)  — — — 92 87 — 
 
 
